                  THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT
                                
                                

          Nur Al-Din Ali and the Damsel Anis Al-Jalis
                                
Quoth Shahrazad  [FN#1]:--It hath reached me, O auspicious King of
intelligence penetrating, that there was, amongst the Kings of
Bassorah [FN#2], a King who loved the poor and needy and cherished
his lieges, and gave of his wealth to all who believed in
Mohammed (whom Allah bless and assain!), and he was even as one
of the poets described him,

"A King who when hosts of the foe invade, * Receives them with
     lance-lunge and sabre-sway;
Writes his name on bosoms in thin red lines, * And scatters the
     horsemen in wild dismay." [FN#3]

His name was King Mohammed bin Sulayman al-Zayni, and he had two
Wazirs, one called Al-Mu'in, son of Sawi and the other Al-Fazl
son of Khakan. Now Al-Fazl was the most generous of the people of
his age, upright of life, so that all hearts united in loving him
and the wise flocked to him for counsel; whilst the subjects used
to pray for his long life, because he was a compendium of the
best qualities, encouraging the good and lief, and preventing
evil and mischief.  But the Wazir Mu'in bin Sawi on the contrary
hated folk  [FN#4] and loved not the good and was a mere compound
of ill; even as was said of him,

"Hold to nobles, sons of nobles! 'tis ever Nature's test  * That
     nobles born of nobles shall excel in noble deed:
And shun the mean of soul, meanly bred, for 'tis the law, *  Mean
     deeds come of men who are mean of blood and breed."

And as much as the people loved and fondly loved Al-Fazl bin
Khakan, so they hated and thoroughly hated the mean and miserly
Mu'in bin Sawi. It befel one day by the decree of the Decreer,
that King Mohammed bin Sulayman al-Zayni, being seated on his
throne with his officers of state about him, summoned his Wazir
Al-Fazl and said to him, "I wish to have a slave-girl of passing
beauty, perfect in loveliness, exquisite in symmetry and endowed
with all praiseworthy gifts."  Said the courtiers, "Such a girl
is not to be bought for less than ten thousand gold pieces:"
whereupon the Sultan called out to his treasurer and said, "Carry
ten thousand dinars to the house of Al-Fazl bin Khakan." The
treasurer did the King's bidding; and the Minister went away,
after receiving the royal charge to repair to the slave-bazar
every day, and entrust to brokers the matter aforesaid.  Moreover
the King issued orders that girls worth above a thousand gold
pieces should not be bought or sold without being first displayed
to the Wazir.  Accordingly no broker purchased a slave-girl ere
she had been paraded before the minister; but none pleased him,
till one day a dealer came to the house and found him taking
horse and intending for the palace.  So he caught hold of his
stirrup saying,

"O thou, who givest to royal state sweet savour, * Thou'rt a
     Wazir shalt never fail of favour!
Dead Bounty thou hast raised to life for men;  * Ne'er fail of
     Allah's grace such high endeavour!"

Then quoth he, "O my lord, that surpassing object for whom the
gracious mandate was issued is at last found;  [FN#5]" and quoth
the Wazir, "Here with her to me!"  So he went away and returned
after a little, bringing a damsel in richest raiment robed, a
maid spear-straight of stature and five feet tall; budding of
bosom with eyes large and black as by Kohl traced, and dewy lips
sweeter than syrup or the sherbet one sips, a virginette smooth
cheeked and shapely faced, whose slender waist with massive hips
was engraced; a form more pleasing than branchlet waving upon the
top-most trees, and a voice softer and gentler than the morning
breeze, even as saith one of those who have described her,

"Strange is the charm which dights her brows like Luna's disk
     that shine; * O sweeter taste than sweetest Robb [FN#6] or
     raisins of the vine.
A throne th'Empyrean keeps for her in high and glorious state, *
     For wit and wisdom, wandlike form and graceful bending line:
She in the Heaven of her face [FN#7] the seven-fold stars
     displays, * That guard her cheeks as satellites against
     the spy's design:
If man should cast a furtive glance or steal far look at her, *
     His heart is burnt by devil-bolts shot by those piercing
     eyne."

When the Wazir saw her she made him marvel with excess of
admiration, so he turned, perfectly pleased, to the broker and
asked, "What is the price of this girl?"; whereto he answered,
"Her market-value stands at ten thousand dinars, but her owner
swears that this sum will not cover the cost of the chickens she
hath eaten, the wine she hath drunken and the dresses of honour
bestowed upon her instructor: for she hath learned calligraphy
and syntax and etymology; the commentaries of the Koran; the
principles of law and religion; the canons of medicine, and the
calendar and the art of playing on musical instruments." [FN#8]
Said the Wazir, "Bring me her master."  So the broker brought him
at once and, behold, he was a Persian of whom there was left only
what the days had left; for he was as a vulture bald and scald
and a wall trembling to its fall.  Time had buffetted him with
sore smart, yet was he not willing this world to depart; even as
said the poet,

"Time hath shattered all my frame, *  Oh! how time hath
     shattered me.
Time with lordly might can tame    * Manly strength and vigour
     free.
Time was in my youth, that none    * Sped their way more fleet    
     and fast:
Time is and my strength is gone,   * Youth is sped, and speed
     is past. [FN#9]"

The Wazir asked him, "Art thou content to sell this slave-girl to
the Sultan for ten thousand dinars?"; and the Persian answered,
"By Allah, if I offer her to the King for naught, it were but my
devoir." [FN#10] So the Minister bade bring the monies and saw
them weighed out to the Persian, who stood up before him and
said, "By the leave of our lord the Wazir, I have somewhat to
say;" and the Wazir replied, "Out with all thou hast!"  "It is my
opinion," continued the slave-dealer, "that thou shouldst not
carry the maid to the King this day; for she is newly off a
journey; the change of air [FN#11] hath affected her and the toils
of trouble have fretted her.  But keep her quiet in thy palace
some ten days, that she may recover her looks and become again as
she was.  Then send her to the Hammam and clothe her in the
richest of clothes and go up with her to the Sultan: this will be
more to thy profit."  The Wazir pondered the Persian's words and
approved of their wisdom; so he carried her to his palace, where
he appointed her private rooms, and allowed her every day
whatever she wanted of meat and drink and so forth.  And on this
wise she abode a while.  Now the Wazir Al-Fazl had a son like the
full moon when sheeniest dight, with face radiant in light,
cheeks ruddy bright, and a mole like a dot of ambergris on a
downy site; as said of him the poet and said full right,

"A moon which blights you [FN#12] if you dare behold; * A branch
     which folds you in its waving fold:
Locks of the Zanj [FN#13] and golden glint of hair; * Sweet gait
     and form a spear to have and hold:
Ah! hard of heart with softest slenderest waist, * That evil to
     this weal why not remould? [FN#14]
Were thy form's softness placed in thy heart, * Ne'er would thy
     lover find thee harsh and cold:
Oh thou accuser! be my love's excuser, * Nor chide if love-pangs
     deal me woes untold!
I bear no blame: 'tis all my hear and eyne; * So leave thy
     blaming, let me yearn and pine."

Now the handsome youth knew not the affair of the damsel; and his
father had enjoined her closely, saying, "Know, O my daughter,
that I have bought thee as a bedfellow for our King, Mohammed bin
Sulayman al-Zayni; and I have a son who is a Satan for girls and
leaves no maid in the neighbourhood without taking her
maidenhead; so be on thy guard against him and beware of letting
him see thy face or hear they voice." "Hearkening and obedience,"
said the girl; and he left her and fared forth.  Some days after
this it happened by decree of Destiny, that the damsel repaired
to the baths in the house, where some of the slave women bathed
her; after which she arrayed herself in sumptuous raiment; and
her beauty and loveliness were thereby redoubled.  Then she went
in to the Wazir's wife and kissed her hand; and the dame said to
her, "Naiman!  May it benefit thee, [FN#15] O Anis al-
Jalis! [FN#16]  Are not our baths handsome?"  "O my mistress," she
replied, "I lacked naught there save thy gracious presence." 
Thereupon the lady said to her slave-women, "Come with us to the
Hammam, for it is some days since we went there:" they answered,
"To hear is to obey!" and rose and all accompanied her. Now she
had set two little slave-girls to keep the door of the private
chamber wherein was Anis al-Jalis and had said to them, "Suffer
none go in to the damsel."  Presently, as the beautiful maiden
sat resting in her rooms, suddenly came in the Wazir's son whose
name was Nur al-Din Ali, [FN#17] and asked after his mother and
her women, to which the two little slave-girls replied, "They are
in the Hammam."  But the damsel, Anis al-Jalis, had heard from
within Nur al-Din Ali's voice and had said to herself, "O would
Heaven I saw what like is this youth against whom the Wazir
warned me, saying that he hath not left a virgin in the
neighbourhood without taking her virginity: by Allah, I do long
to have sight of him!"  So she sprang to her feet with the
freshness of the bath on her and, stepping to the door, looked at
Nur al-Din Ali and saw a youth like the moon in its full and the
sight bequeathed her a thousand sighs. The young man also glanced
at her and the look make him heir to a thousand thoughts of care;
and each fell into Love's ready snare.  Then he stepped up to the
two little slave-girls and cried aloud at them; whereupon both
fled before him and stood afar off to see what he would do.  And
behold, he walked to the door of the damsel's chamber and,
opening it, went in and asked her "Art thou she my father bought
for me?" and she answered "Yes." Thereupon the youth, who was
warm with wine, came up to her and embraced her; then he took her
legs and passed them round his waist and she wound her arms about
his neck, and met him with kisses and murmurs of pleasure and
amorous toyings.  Next he sucked her tongue and she sucked his,
and lastly, he loosed the strings of her petticoat-trousers and
abated her maidenhead.  When the two little slave-girls saw their
young master get in unto the damsel, Anis al-Jalis, they cried
out and shrieked; so as soon as the youth had had his wicked will
of her, he rose and fled forth fearing the consequences of his
ill-doing.  When the Wazir's wife heard the slave-girls' cries,
she sprang up and came out of the baths with the perspiration
pouring from her face, saying, "What is this unseemly clamour in
the house [FN#18]?"  Then she came up to the two little slave-
girls and asked them saying, "Fie upon you! what is the matter?";
and both answered, "Verily our lord Nur al-Din came in and beat
us, so we fled; then he went up to Anis al-Jalis and threw his
arms round her and we know not what he did after that; but when
we cried out to thee he ran away."  Upon this the lady went to
Anis al-Jalis and said to her, "What tidings?"  "O my lady," she
answered, "as I was sitting here lo! a handsome young man came in
and said to me:--Art thou she my father bought for me?; and I
answered Yes; for, by Allah, O mistress mine, I believed that his
words were true; and he instantly came in and embraced me."  "Did
he nought else with thee but this?" quoth the lady, and quoth
she, "Indeed he did!  But he did it only three times." "He did
not leave thee without dishonouring thee!" cried the Wazir's wife
and fell to weeping and buffetting her face, she and the girl and
all the handmaidens, fearing lest Nur al-Din's father should kill
him. [FN#19]  Whilst they were thus, in came the Wazir and asked
what was the matter, and his wife said to him, "Swear that whatso
I tell thee thou wilt attend to it."  "I will," answered he.  So
she related to him what his son had done, whereat he was much
concerned and rent his raiment and smote his face till his nose
bled, and plucked out his beard by the handful. "Do not kill
thyself," said his wife, "I will give thee ten thousand dinars,
her price, of my own money."  But he raised his head and cried,
"Out upon thee!  I have no need of her purchase-money: my fear is
lest life as well as money go."  "O my lord, and how is that?" 
"Wottest thou not that yonder standeth our enemy Al Mu'in bin
Sawi who, as soon as he shall hear of this matter, will go up to
the Sultan"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

              When it was the Thirty-fifth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Wazir said to his wife, "Wottest thou not that yonder standeth
our enemy Al-Mu'in bin Sawi who, as soon as he hears of this
matter will go up to the Sultan and say to him, 'Thy Wazir who,
thou wilt have it loveth thee, took from thee ten thousand ducats
and bought therewith a slave-girl whose like none ever beheld;
but when he saw her, she pleased him and he said to his son,
'Take her: thou art worthier of her than the Sultan.'  So he took
her and did away with her virginity and she is now in his house.' 
The King will say, 'Thou liest!' to which he will reply, 'With
thy leave I will fall upon him unawares and bring her to thee.' 
The King will give him warranty for this and he will come down
upon the house and will take the girl and present her to the
Sultan, who will question her and she will not be able to deny
the past.  Then mine enemy will say, 'O my lord, thou wottest
that I give thee the best of counsel; but I have not found favour
in thine eyes.'  Thereupon the Sultan will make an example of me,
and I shall be a gazing-stock to all the people and my life will
be lost."  Quoth his wife, "Let none know of this thing which
hath happened privily, and commit thy case to Allah and trust in
Him to save thee from such strait; for He who knoweth the future
shall provide for the future."  With this she brought the Wazir a
cup of wine and his heart was quieted, and he ceased to feel
wrath and fear.  Thus far concerning him; but as regards his son
Nur al-Din Ali, fearing the consequence of his misdeed he abode
his day long in the flower garden and came back only at night to
his mother's apartment where he slept; and, rising before dawn,
returned to the gardens.  He ceased not to do thus for two whole
months without showing his face to his parent, till at last his
mother said to his father, "O my lord, shall we lose our boy as
well as the girl?  If matters continue long in this way he will
flee from us."  "And what to do?" asked he; and she answered, "Do
thou watch this night; and, when he cometh, seize on him and
frighten him: I will rescue him from thee and do thou make peace
with him and give him the damsel to wife, for she loveth him as
he loveth her.  And I will pay thee her price." So the Minister
say up that night and, when his son came, he seized him and
throwing him down knelt on his breast and showed as thou he would
cut his throat; but his mother ran to the youth's succour and
asked her husband, "What wouldest thou do with him?"  He answered
her, "I will split his weasand."  Said the son to the father, "Is
my death, then, so light a matter to thee?"; and his father's
eyes welled with tears, for natural affection moved him, and he
rejoined, "O my son, how light was to thee the loss of my good
and my life!"  Quoth Nur al-Din, "Hear, O my father, what the
poet hath said,

'Forgive me! thee-ward sinned I, but the wise * Ne'er to the
     sinner shall deny his grace:
Thy foe may pardon sue when lieth he * In lowest, and thou
     holdest highest place!'"

Thereupon the Wazir rose from off his son's breast saying, "I
forgive thee!"; for his heart yearned to him; and the youth
kissed the hand of his sire who said, "O my son, were I sure that
thou wouldest deal justly by Anis al-Jalis, I would give her to
thee."  "O my father, what justice am I to do to her?"  "I enjoin
thee, O my son, not to take another wife or concubine to share
with her, nor sell her."  "O my father! I swear to thee that
verily I will not do her injustice in either way."  Having sworn
to that effect Nur al-Din went in to the damsel and abode with
her a whole year, whilst Allah Almighty caused the King to forget
the matter of the maiden; and Al-Mu'in, though the affair came to
his ears, dared not divulge it by reason of the high favour in
which his rival stood with the Sultan.  At the end of the year
Al-Fazl went one day to the public baths; and, as he came out
whilst he was still sweating, the air struck him [FN#20] and he
caught a cold which turned to a fever; then he took to his bed. 
His malady gained ground and restlessness was longsome upon him
and weakness bound him like a chain; so he called out, "Hither
with my son;" and when Nur al-Din Ali came he said to him, "O my
son, know that man's lot and means are distributed and decreed;
and the end of days by all must be dree'd; and that every soul
drain the cup of death is nature's need."  The he repeated these
lines,

"I die my death, but He alone is great who dieth not! * And well
     I wot, soon shall I die, for death was made my lot:
A King there's not that dies and holds his kingdom in his hand, *
     For Sovranty the Kingdom is of Him who dieth not."

Then he continued, "O my son, I have no charge to leave thee save
that thou fear Allah and look to the issues of thine acts and
bear in mind my injunctions anent Anis al-Jalis."  "O my father!"
said Nur al-Din, "who is like unto thee?  Indeed thou art famed
for well doing and preachers offer prayers for thee in their
pulpits!"  Quoth Al-Fazl, "O my son, I hope that Allah Almighty
may grant me acceptance!"  Then he pronounced the Two
Testimonies, [FN#21] or Professions of the Faith, and was recorded
among the blessed.  The palace was filled with crying and
lamentation and the news of his death reached the King, and the
city-people wept, even those at their prayers and women at
household cares and the school-children shed tears for Bin-
Khakan.  Then his son Nur al-Din Ali arose and made ready his
funeral, and the Emirs and Wazirs and high Officers of State and
city-notables were present, amongst them the Wazir al-Mu'in bin
Sawi.  And as the bier went forth from the house some one in the
crowd of mourners began to chant these lines,

"On the fifth day I quitted al my friends for evermore, * And
     they laid me out and washed me on a slab without my
     door: [FN#22]
They stripped me of the clothes I was ever wont to wear, * And
     they clothed me in the clothes which till then I never wore.
On four men's necks they bore me and carried me from home * To
     chapel; and some prayed for him on neck they bore:
They prayed for me a prayer that no prostration knows; [FN#23] *
     They prayed for me who praised me and were my friends of
     yore;
And they laid me in a house with a ceiling vaulted o'er, * And
     Time shall be no more ere it ope to me its door."

When they had shovelled in the dust over him and the crowd had
dispersed, Nur al-Din returned home and he lamented with sobs and
tears; and the tongue of the case repeated these couplets,

"On the fifth day at even-tide they went away from me: * 
     farewelled them as faring they made farewell my lot:
But my spirit as they went, with them went and so I cried, * 'Ah
     return ye!' but replied she, 'Alas! return is not
To a framework lere and lorn that lacketh blood and life, * A
     frame whereof remaineth naught but bones that rattle and
     rot:
Mine eyes are blind and cannot see quencht by the flowing tear! *
     Mine ears are dull and lost to sense: they have no power to
     hear!'"

He abode a long time sorrowing for his father till, one day, as
he was sitting at home, there came a knocking at the door; so he
rose in haste and opening let in a man, one of his father's
intimates and who had been the Wazir's boon-companion.  The
visitor kissed Nur al-Din's hand and said to him, "O my lord, he
who hath left the like of thee is not dead; and this way went
also the Chief of the Ancients and the Moderns.  [FN#24] O my lord
Ali, be comforted and leave sorrowing."  Thereupon Nur al-Din
rose and going to the guest-saloon transported thither all he
needed. Then he assembled his companions and took his handmaid
again; and, collecting round him ten of the sons of the
merchants, began to eat meat and drink wine, giving entertainment
after entertainment and lavishing his presents and his favours. 
One day his Steward came to him and said, "O my lord Nur al-Din,
hast thou not heard the saying, Whoso spendeth and reckoneth not,
to poverty wendeth and recketh not?"  And he repeated what the
poet wrote,

"I look to my money and keep it with care, * For right well I wot
     'tis my buckler and brand:
Did I lavish my dirhams on hostilest foes, [FN#25] * I should
     truck my good luck by mine ill luck trepanned:
So I'll eat it and drink it and joy in my wealth; * And no
     spending my pennies on others I'll stand:
I will keep my purse close 'gainst whoever he be; * And a niggard
     in grain a true friend ne'er I fand:
Far better deny him than come to say:--Lend, * And five-fold the
     loan shall return to thy hand!
And he turns face aside and he sidles away, * While I stand like
     a dog disappointed, unmanned,
Oh, the sorry lot his who hath yellow-boys none, * Though his
     genius and virtues shine bright as the sun!

O my master," continued the Steward, "this lavish outlay and
these magnificent gifts waste away wealth."  When Nur al-Din Ali
heard these words he looked at his servant and cried, "Of all
thou hast spoken I will not heed one single word, for I have
heard the saying of the poet who saith,

'An my palm be full of wealth and my wealth I ne'er bestow, * A
     palsy take my hand and my foot ne'er rise again!
Show my niggard who by niggardise e'er rose to high degree, * Or
     the generous gifts generally hath slain.'"

And he pursued, "Know, O Steward, it is my desire that so long as
thou hast money enough for my breakfast, thou trouble me not with
taking thought about my supper."  Thereupon the Steward asked,
"Must it be so?"; and he answered, "It must."  So the honest man
went his way and Nur al-Din Ali devoted himself to extravagance;
and, if any of his cup-companions chanced to say, "This is a
pretty thing;" he would reply, "'Tis a gift to thee!"; or if
another said, "O my lord, such a house is handsome;" he would
answer, "Take it: it is thine!"  After this reckless fashion he
continued to live for a whole year, giving his friends a banquet
in the morning and a banquet in the evening and a banquet at
midnight, till one day, as the company was sitting together, the
damsel Anis al-Jalis repeated these lines,

"Thou deemedst well of Time when days went well, * And feardest
     not what ills might deal thee Fate:
Thy nights so fair and restful cozened thee, *  For peaceful
     nights bring woes of heavy weight."

When she had ended her verse behold, somebody knocked at the
door. So Nur al-Din rose to open it and one of his boon-
companions followed him without being perceived.  At the door he
found his Steward and asked him, "What is the matter?"; and he
answered, "O my lord, what I dreaded for thee hath come to pass!" 
"How so?"  "Know that there remains not a dirham's worth, less or
more in my hands.  Here are my Daftars and account books showing
both income and outlay and the registers of thine original
property."  When Nur al-Din heard these words he bowed his head
and said, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in
Allah!"  When the man who had followed him privily to spy on him
heard the Steward's words, he returned to his friends and warned
them saying, "Look ye well to what ye do: Nur al-Din is
penniless;" and, as the young host came back to his guests,
vexation showed itself in his face.  Thereupon one of the
intimates rose; and, looking at the entertainer, said to him, "O
my lord, may be thou wilt give me leave to retire?"  "And why so
early retirement this day?"; asked he and the other answered him,
"My wife is in childbirth and I may not be absent from her:
indeed I must return and see how she does."  So he gave him
leave, whereupon another rose and said, "O my lord Nur al-Din, I
wish now to go to my brother's for he circumciseth his son to-
day." [FN#26]  In short each and every asked permission to retire
on some pretence or other, till all the ten were gone leaving Nur
al-Din alone.  Then he called his slave-girl and said to her, "O
Anis al-Jalis, hast thou seen what case is mine?"  And he related
to her what the Steward had told him.  Then quoth she, "O my
lord, for many nights I had it in my mind to speak with thee of
this matter, but I heard thee repeating,

'When the World heaps favours on thee, pass on * Thy favours to
     friends ere her hand she stay:
Largesse never let her when fain she comes, * Nor niggardise kept
     her from turning away!'

When I heard these verses I held my peace and cared not to
exchange a word with thee."  "O Anis al-Jalis," said Nur al-Din,
"thou knowest that I have not wasted my wealth save on my
friends, especially these ten who have now left me a pauper, and
I think they will not abandon and desert me without relief."  "By
Allah," replied she, "they will not profit thee with aught of
aid."  Said he, "I will rise at once and go to them and knock at
their doors; it may be I shall get from them somewhat wherewith I
may trade and leave pastime and pleasuring."  So he rose without
stay or delay, and repaired to a street wherein all his ten
friends lived.  He went up to the nearest door and knocked;
whereupon a handmaid came out and asked him, "Who art thou?"; and
he answered, "Tell thy master that Nur al-Din Ali standeth at the
door and saith to him, 'Thy slave kisseth thy hand and awaiteth
thy bounty.'"  The girl went in and told her master, who cried at
her, "Go back and say, 'My master is not at home.'"  So she
returned to Nur al-Din, and said to him, "O my lord, my master is
out."  Thereupon he turned away and said to himself, "If this one
be a whoreson knave and deny himself, another may not prove
himself such knave and whoreson."  Then he went up to the next
door and sent in a like message to the house-master, who denied
himself as the first had done, whereupon he began repeating,

"He is gone who when to his gate thou go'st, * Fed thy famisht
     maw with his boiled and roast."

When he had ended his verse he said, "By Allah, there is no help
but that I make trial of them all: perchance there be one amongst
them who will stand me in the stead of all the rest."  So he went
the round of the ten, but not one of them would open his door to
him or show himself or even break a bit of bread before him;
whereupon he recited,

"Like a tree is he who in wealth doth wone, * And while fruits he
     the folk to his fruit shall run:
But when bared the tree of what fruit it bare, * They leave it to
     suffer from dust and sun.
Perdition to all of this age!  I find * Ten rogues for every
     righteous one."

Then he returned to his slave-girl and his grief had grown more
grievous and she said to him, "O my lord, did I not tell thee,
none would profit thee with aught of aid?"  And he replied, "By
Allah, not one of them would show me his face or know me!"  "O my
lord," quoth she, "sell some of the moveables and household
stuff, such as pots and pans, little by little; and expend the
proceeds until Allah Almighty shall provide."  So he sold all of
that was in the house till nothing remained when he turned to
Anis al-Jalis and asked her "What shall we do now?"; and she
answered, "O my lord, it is my advice that thou rise forthwith
and take me down to the bazar and sell me.  Thou knowest that
they father bought me for ten thousand dinars: haply Allah may
open thee a way to get the same price, and if it be His will to
bring us once more together, we shall meet again."  "O Anis al-
Jalis," cried he, "by Allah it is no light matter for me to be
parted from thee for a single hour!"  "By Allah, O my lord," she
replied, "nor is it easy to me either, but Need hath its own law,
as the poet said,

'Need drives a man into devious roads, * And pathways doubtful of
     trend and scope:
No man to a rope [FN#27] will entrust his weight, * Save for cause
     that calleth for case of rope.'"

Thereupon he rose to his feet and took her, [FN#28] whilst the
tears rolled down his cheek like rain; and he recited with the
tongue of the case these lines,

"Stay! grant one parting look before we part, * Nerving my heart
     this severance to sustain:
But, an this parting deal thee pain and bane, * Leave me to die
     of love and spare thee pain!"

Then he went down with her to the bazar and delivered her to the
broker and said to him, "O Hajj Hasan, [FN#29] I pray thee note
the value of her thou hast to cry for sale."  "O my lord Nur al-
Din," quoth the broker, "the fundamentals are remembered;" [FN#30]
adding, "Is not this the Anis al-Jalis whom thy father bought of
me for ten thousand dinars?" "Yes," said Nur al-Din.  Thereupon
the broker went round to the merchants, but found that all had
not yet assembled.  So he waited till the rest had arrived and
the market was crowded with slave-girls of all nations, Turks,
Franks and Circassians; Abyssinians, Nubians and Takruris; [FN#31]
Tartars, Georgians and others; when he came forward and standing
cried aloud, "O merchants! O men of money! every round thing is
not a walnut and every long thing a banana is not; all reds are
not meat nor all whites fat, nor is every brown thing a
date! [FN#32]  O merchants, I have here this union-pearl that hath
no price: at what sum shall I cry her?" "Cry her at four thousand
five hundred dinars," quoth one of the traders. The broker opened
the door of sale at the sum named and, as he was yet calling, lo!
the Wazir Al-Mu'in bin Sawi passed through the bazar and, seeing
Nur al-Din Ali waiting at one side, said to himself, "Why is
Khakan's son [FN#33] standing about here?  Hath this gallows-bird
aught remaining wherewith to buy slave-girls?"  Then he looked
round and, seeing the broker calling out in the market with all
the merchants around him, said to himself, "I am sure that he is
penniless and hath brought hither the damsel Anis al-Jalis for
sale;" adding, "O how cooling and grateful is this to my heart!" 
Then he called the crier, who came up and kissed the ground
before him; and he said to him, "I want this slave-girl whom thou
art calling for sale."  The broker dared not cross him, so he
answered, "O my lord, Bismillah! in Allah's name so be it;" and
led forward the damsel and showed her to him.  She pleased him
much whereat he asked, "O Hasan, what is bidden for this girl?"
and he answered, "Four thousand five hundred dinars to open the
door of sale." Quoth Al-Mu'in, "Four thousand five hundred is MY
bid."  When the merchants heard this, they held back and dared
not bid another dirham, wotting what they did of the Wazir's
tyranny, violence and treachery. So Al-Mu'in looked at the broker
and said to him, "Why stand still? Go and offer four thousand
dinars for me and the five hundred shall be for thyself." 
Thereupon the broker went to Nur al-Din and said, "O my lord, thy
slave is going for nothing!"  "And how so?" asked he. The broker
answered, "We had opened the biddings for her at four thousand
five hundred dinars; when that tyrant, Al-Mu'in bin Sawi, passed
through the bazar and, as he saw the damsel she pleased him, so
he cried to me, 'Call me the buyer at four thousand dinars and
thou shalt have five hundred for thyself.'  I doubt not but that
he knoweth that the damsel if thine, and if he would pay thee
down her price at once it were well; but I know his injustice and
violence; he will give thee a written order upon some of his
agents and will send after thee to say to them, 'Pay him
nothing.'  So as often as though shalt go in quest of the coin
they will say, 'We'll pay thee presently!' and they will put thee
off day after day, and thou art proud of spirit; till at last,
when they are wearied with thine importunity, they will say,
'Show us the cheque.' Then, as soon as they have got hold of it
they will tear it up and so thou wilt lose the girl's price."
When Nur al-Din heard this he looked at the broker and asked him,
"How shall this matter be managed?"; and he answered, "I will
give thee a counsel which, if thou follow, it shall bring thee
complete satisfaction." "And what is that?" quoth Nur al-Din.
Quoth the broker, "Come thou to me anon when I am standing in the
middle of the market and, taking the girl from my hand, give her
a sound cuffing and say to her, 'Thou baggage, I have kept my vow
and brought thee down to the slave-market, because I swore an
oath that I would carry thee from home to the bazar, and make
brokers cry thee for sale.'  If thou do this, perhaps the device
will impose upon the Wazir and the people, and they will believe
that thou broughtest her not to the bazar, but for the quittance
of thine oath." He replied, "Such were the best way." Then the
broker left him and, returning into the midst of the market, took
the damsel by the hand, and signed to the Wazir and said, "O my
lord, here is her owner." With this up came Nur al-Din Ali and,
snatching the girl from the broker's hand, cuffed her soundly and
said to her, "Shame on thee, O thou baggage!  I have brought thee
to the bazar for quittance of mine oath; now get thee home and
thwart me no more as is thy wont.  Woe to thee! do I need thy
price, that I should sell thee? The furniture of my house would
fetch thy value many times over!" When Al-Mu'in saw this he said
to Nur al-Din, "Out on thee!  Hast thou anything left for selling
or buying?"  And he would have laid violent hands upon him, but
the merchants interposed (for they all loved Nur al-Din), and the
young man said to them, "Here am I in your hands and ye all know
his tyranny."  "By Allah," cried the Wazir, "but for you I had
slain him!"  Then all signed with significant eyes to Nur al-Din
as much as to say, "Take thy wreak of him; not one of us will
come between thee and him."  Thereupon Nur al-Din, who was stout
of heart as he was stalwart of limb, went up to the Wazir and,
dragging him over the pommel of his saddle, threw him to the
ground.  Now there was in that place a puddling- pit for brick-
clay, [FN#34] into the midst of which he fell, and Nur al-Din kept
pummelling and fisti-cuffing him, and one of the blows fell full
on his teeth, and his beard was dyed with his blood.  Also there
were with the minister ten armed slaves who, seeing their master
entreated after this fashion, laid hand on sword-hilt and would
have bared blades and fallen on Nur al-Din to cut him down; but
the merchants and bystanders said to them, "This is a Wazir and
that is the son of a Wazir; haply they will make friends some
time or other, in which case you will forfeit the favour of both. 
Or perchance a blow may befal your lord, and you will all die the
vilest of deaths; so it were better for you not to interfere."
Accordingly they held aloof and, when Nur al-Din had made an end
of thrashing the Wazir, he took his handmaid and fared homewards.
Al-Mu'in also went his ways at once, with his raiment dyed of
three colours, black with mud, red with blood and ash coloured
with brick-clay. When he saw himself in this state, he bound a
bit of matting [FN#35] round his neck and, taking in hand two
bundles of coarse Halfah-grass, [FN#36] went up to the palace and
standing under the Sultan's windows cried aloud, "O King of the
age, I am a wronged man!  I am foully wronged!"  So they brought
him before the King who looked at him; and behold, it was the
chief Minister; whereupon he said, "O Wazir who did this deed by
thee?"  Al-Mu'in wept and sobbed and repeated these lines,

"Shall the World oppress me when thou art in't? * In the lion's
     presence shall wolves devour?
Shall the dry all drink of thy tanks and I * Under rain-cloud
     thirst for the cooling shower?"

"O my lord," cried he, "the like will befal every one who loveth
and serveth thee well."  "Be quick with thee," quoth the Sultan,
"and tell me how this came to pass and who did this deed by one
whose honour is part of my honour."  Quoth the Wazir, "Know, O my
lord, that I went out this day to the slave-market to buy me a
cookmaid, when I saw there a damsel, never in my life long saw I
a fairer; and I designed to buy her for our lord the Sultan; so I
asked the broker of her and of her owner, and he answered, "She
belongeth to Ali son of Al-Fazl bin Khakan.  Some time ago our
lord the Sultan gave his father ten thousand dinars wherewith to
buy him a handsome slave-girl, and he bought this maiden who
pleased him; so he grudged her to our lord the Sultan and gave
her to his own son. When the father died, the son sold all he had
of houses and gardens and household gear, and squandered the
price till he was penniless.  Then he brought the girl to the
market that he might sell her, and he handed her over to the
broker to cry and the merchants bid higher and higher on her,
until the price reached four thousand dinars; whereupon quoth I
to myself, 'I will buy this damsel for our lord the Sultan, whose
money was paid for her.'  So I said to Nur al-Din, 'O my son,
sell her to me for four thousand dinars.'  When he heard my words
he looked at me and cried, 'O ill-omened oldster, I will sell her
to a Jew or to a Nazarene, but I will not sell her to thee!'  'I
do not buy her for myself,' said I, 'I buy her for our lord and
benefactor the Sultan.'  Hearing my words he was filled with
rage; and, dragging me off my horse (and I a very old man), beat
me unmercifully with his fists and buffeted me with his palms
till he left me as thou seest, and all this hath befallen me only
because I thought to buy this damsel for thee!"  Then the Wazir
threw himself on the ground and lay there weeping and shivering. 
When the Sultan saw his condition and heard his story, the vein
of rage started out between his eyes [FN#37] and he turned to his
body-guard who stood before him, forty white slaves, smiters with
the sword, and said to them, "Go down forthright to the house
built by the son of Khakan and sack it and raze it and bring to
me his son Nur al-Din with the damsel; and drag them both on
their faces with their arms pinioned behind them."  They replied,
"To hear is to obey;" and, arming themselves, they set out for
the house of Nur al-Din Ali.  Now about the Sultan was a
Chamerlain, Alam [FN#38] al-Din Sanjar hight, who had aforetime
been Mameluke to Al-Fazl; but he had risen in the world and the
Sultan had advanced him to be one of his Chamberlains.  When he
heard the King's command and saw the enemies make them ready to
slay his old master's son, it was grievous to him: so he went out
from before the Sultan and, mounting his beast, rode to Nur al-
Din's house and knocked at the door.  Nur al-Din came out and
knowing him would have saluted him: but he said, "O my master
this is no time for greeting or treating.  Listen to what the
poet said,

  'Fly, fly with thy life if by ill overtaken!
   Let thy house speak thy death by its builder forsaken!
   For a land else than this land thou may'st reach, my brother,
   But thy life tho'lt ne'er find in this world another.'" [FN#39]

"O Alam al-Din what cheer?" asked Nur al-Din, and he answered,
"Rise quickly and fly for thy life, thou and the damsel; for Al-
Mu'in hath set a snare for you both; and, if you fall into his
hands, he will slay you.  The Sultan hath despatched forty
sworders against you and I counsel you to flee ere harm can hurt
you."  Then Sanjar put his hand to his purse and finding there
forty gold pieces took them and gave them to Nur al-Din, saying,
"O my lord receive these and journey with them.  Had I more I
would give them to thee, but this is not the time to take
exception." Thereupon Nur al-Din went in to the damsel and told
her what had happened, at which she wrung her hands.  Then they
fared forth at once from the city, and Allah spread over them His
veil of protection, so that they reached the river-bank where
they found a vessel ready for sea.  Her skipper was standing
amidships and crying, "Whoso hath aught to do, whether in the way
of provisioning or taking leave of his people; or whoso hath
forgotten any needful thing, let him do it at once and return,
for we are about to sail"; and all of them saying, "There is
naught left to be done by us, O captain!", he cried to his crew,
"Hallo there! cast off the cable and pull up the mooring-
pole!" [FN#40] Quoth Nur al-Din, "Whither bound, O captain?" and
quoth he, "To the House of Peace, Baghdad," -And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

              When it was the Thirty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
skipper answered, "To the House of Peace, Baghdad," Nur al-Din
Ali and the damsel went on board, and they launched the craft and
shook out the sails, and the ship sped forth as though she were a
bird on wing; even as said one of them and said right well,

"Watch some tall ship, she'll joy the sight of thee, * The breeze
     outstripping in her haste to flee;
As when a bird, with widely-spreading wings, * Leaveth the sky to
     settle on the sea."

So the vessel sailed on her fastest and the wind to her was
fairest. Thus far concerning them; but as regards the Mamelukes,
they went to Nur al-Din's mansion and, breaking open the doors,
entered and searched the whole place, but could find no trace of
him and the damsel; so they demolished the house and, returning
to the Sultan, reported their proceedings; whereupon quoth he,
"Make search for them both, wherever they may be;" and they
answered, "Hearing is obeying."  The Wazir Al-Mu'in had also gone
home after the Sultan had bestowed upon him a robe of honour, and
had set his heart at rest by saying, "None shall take blood-wreak
for thee save I;" and he had blessed the King and prayed for his
long life and prosperity.  Then the Sultan bade proclaim about
the city, "Oyez, O ye lieges one and all!  It is the will of our
lord the Sultan that whoso happeneth on Nur al-Din Ali son of Al-
Fazl bin Khakan, and bringeth him to the Sultan, shall receive a
robe of honour and one thousand gold pieces; and he who hideth
him or knoweth his abiding place and informeth not, deserveth
whatsoever pains and penalties shall befal him."  So all began to
search for Nur al-Din Ali, but they could find neither trace nor
tidings of him.  Meanwhile he and his handmaid sailed on with the
wind right aft, till they arrived in safety at Baghdad, and the
captain said to them, "This is Baghdad and 'tis the city where
security is to be had: Winter with his frosts hath turned away
and Prime hath come his roses to display; and the flowers are a-
glowing and the trees are blowing and the streams are flowing." 
So Nur al-Din landed, he and his handmaid and, giving the captain
five dinars, walked on a little way till the decrees of Destiny
brought them among the gardens, and they came to a place swept
and sprinkled, with benches along the walls and hanging jars
filled with water. [FN#41]  Overhead was a trellis of reed-work
and canes shading the whole length of the avenue, and at the
upper end was a garden gate, but this was locked.  "By Allah,"
quoth Nur al-Din to the damsel, "right pleasant is this place!";
and she replied, "O my lord sit with me a while on this bench and
let us take our ease."  So they mounted and sat them down on the
bench, after which they washed their faces and hands; and the
breeze blew cool on them and they fell asleep and glory be to Him
who never sleepeth!  Not this garden was named the Garden of
Gladness [FN#42] and therein stood a belvedere hight the Palace of
Pleasure and the Pavilion of Pictures, the whole belonging to the
Caliph Harun al-Rashid who was wont, when his breast was
straitened with care, to frequent garden and palace and there to
sit.  The palace had eighty latticed windows and fourscore lamps
hanging round a great candelabrum of gold furnished with wax-
candles; and, when the Caliph used to enter, he would order the
handmaids to throw open the lattices and light up the rooms; and
he would bid Ishak bin Ibrahim the cup-companion and the slave-
girls to sing till his breast was broadened and his ailments were
allayed.  Now the keeper of the garden, Shaykh Ibrahim, was a
very old man, and he had found from time to time, when he went
out on any business, people pleasuring about the garden gate with
their bona robas; at which he was angered with exceeding
anger. [FN#43]  But he took patience till one day when the Caliph
came to his garden; and he complained of this to Harun al-Rashid
who said, "Whomsoever thou surprisest about the door of the
garden, deal with him as thou wilt."  Now on this day the
Gardener chanced to be abroad on some occasion and returning
found these two sleeping at the gate covered with a single
mantilla; whereupon said he, "By Allah, good!  These twain know
not that the Caliph hath given me leave to slay anyone I may
catch at the door; but I will give this couple a shrewd whipping,
that none may come near the gate in future."  So he cut a green
palm-frond [FN#44] and went up to them and, raising his arm till
the white of his arm-pit appeared, was about to strike them, when
he bethought himself and said, "O Ibrahim, wilt thou beat them
unknowing their case?  Haply they are strangers or of the Sons of
the Road, [FN#45] and the decrees of Destiny have thrown them
here.  I will uncover their faces and look at them."  So he
lifted up the mantilla from their heads and said, "They are a
handsome couple; it were not fitting that I should beat them." 
Then he covered their faces again and, going to Nur al-Din's
feet, began to rub and shampoo them, [FN#46] whereupon the youth
opened his eyes and, seeing an old man of grave and reverend
aspect rubbing his feet, he was ashamed and drawing them in, sat
up.  Then he took Shaykh Ibrahim's hand and kissed it.  Quoth the
old man, "O my son, whence art thou?"; and quoth he, "O my lord,
we two are strangers," and the tears started from his eyes.  "O
my son," said Shaykh Ibrahim, "know that the Prophet (whom Allah
bless and preserve!) hath enjoined honour to the stranger;" and
added, "Wilt not thou arise, O my son, and pass into the garden
and solace thyself by looking at it and gladden thy heart?"  "O
my lord," said Nur al-Din, "to whom doth this garden belong?;"
and the other replied, "O my son, I have inherited it from my
folk."  Now his object in saying this was to set them at their
ease and induce them to enter the garden.  So Nur al-Din thanked
him and rose, he and the damsel, and followed him into the
garden; and lo! it was a garden, and what a garden!  The gate was
arched like a great hall and over walls and roof ramped vines
with grapes of many colours; the red like rubies and the black
like ebonies; and beyond it lay a bower of trelliced boughs
growing fruits single and composite, and small birds on branches
sang with melodious recite, and the thousand-noted nightingale
shrilled with her varied shright; the turtle with her cooing
filled the site; the blackbird whistled like human wight [FN#47]
and the ring-dove moaned like a drinker in grievous plight.  The
trees grew in perfection all edible growths and fruited all
manner fruits which in pairs were bipartite; with the camphor-
apricot, the almond-apricot and the apricot "Khorasani" hight;
the plum, like the face of beauty, smooth and bright; the cherry
that makes teeth shine clear by her sleight, and the fig of three
colours, green, purple and white.  There also blossomed the
violet as it were sulphur on fire by night; the orange with buds
like pink coral and marguerite; the rose whose redness gars the
loveliest cheeks blush with despight; and myrtle and gilliflower
and lavender with the blood-red anemone from Nu'uman hight.  The
leaves were all gemmed with tears the clouds had dight; the
chamomile smiled showing teeth that bite, and Narcissus with his
negro [FN#48] eyes fixed on Rose his sight; the citrons shone with
fruits embowled and the lemons like balls of gold; earth was
carpeted with flowers tinctured infinite; for Spring was come
brightening the place with joy and delight; and the streams ran
ringing, to the birds' gay singing, while the rustling breeze
upspringing attempered the air to temperance exquisite.  Shaykh
Ibrahim carried them up into the pavilion, and they gazed on its
beauty, and on the lamps aforementioned in the latticed windows;
and Nur al-Din, remembering his entertainments of time past,
cried, "By Allah, this is a pleasant place; it hath quenched in
me anguish which burned as a fire of Ghaza-wood. [FN#49]"  Then
they sat down and Shaykh Ibrahim set food before them; and they
ate till they were satisfied and washed their hands: after which
Nur al-Din went up to one of the latticed windows, and, calling
to his handmaid fell to gazing on the trees laden with all manner
fruits.  Presently he turned to the Gardener and said to him, "O
Shaykh Ibrahim hast thou no drink here, for folk are wont to
drink after eating?"  The Shaykh brought him sweet water, cool
and pleasant, but he said, "This is not the kind of drink I
wanted." "Perchance thou wishest for wine?"  "Indeed I do, O
Shaykh!"  "I seek refuge from it with Allah: it is thirteen years
since I did this thing, for the Prophet (Abhak [FN#50]) cursed its
drinker, presser, seller and carrier!"  "Hear two words of me." 
"Say on."  "If yon cursed ass [FN#51] which standeth there be
cursed, will aught of his curse alight upon thee?" "By no means!" 
"Then take this dinar and these two dirhams and mount yonder ass
and, halting afar from the wine-shop, call the first man thou
seest buying liquor and say to him, 'Take these two dirhams for
thyself, and with this dinar buy me some wine and set it on the
ass.' So shalt thou be neither the presser, nor the buyer, nor
the carrier; and no part of the curse will fall  upon thee."  At
this Shaykh Ibrahim laughed and said, "By Allah, O my son, I
never saw one wilier of wit than thou art, nor heard aught
sweeter than thy speech."  So he did as he was bidden by Nur al-
Din who thanked him and said, "We two are now dependent on thee,
and it is only meet that thou comply with our wishes; so bring us
here what we require."  "O my son," replied he, "this is my
buttery before thee" (and it was the store-room provided for the
Commander of the Faithful); "so go in, and take whatso thou wilt,
for there is over and above what thou wantest."  Nur al-Din then
entered the pantry and found therein vessels of gold and silver
and crystal set with all kinds of gems, and was amazed and
delighted with what he saw.  Then he took out what he needed and
set it on and poured the wine into flagons and glass ewers,
whilst Shaykh Ibrahim brought them fruit and flowers and aromatic
herbs. Then the old man withdrew and sat down at a distance from
them, whilst they drank and made merry, till the wine got the
better of them, so that their cheeks reddened and their eyes
wantoned like the gazelle's; and their locks became dishevelled
and their brightness became yet more beautiful.  Then said Shaykh
Ibrahim to himself, "What aileth me to sit apart from them?  Why
should I not sit with them?  When shall I ever find myself in
company with the like of these two that favour two moons?" So he
stepped forward and sat down on the edge of the dais, and Nur al-
Din said to him, "O my lord, my life on thee, come nearer to us!" 
He came and sat by them, when Nur al-Din filled a cup and looked
towards the Shaykh and said to him, "Drink, that thou mayest try
the taste of it!" "I take refuge from it with Allah!" replied he;
"for thirteen years I have not done a thing of the kind."  Nur
al-Din feigned to forget he was there and, drinking off the cup,
threw himself on the ground as if the drink had overcome him;
whereupon Anis al-Jalis glanced at him and said, "O Shaykh
Ibrahim see how this husband of mine treateth me;" and he
answered, "O my lady, what aileth him?"  "This is how he always
serveth me," cried she, "he drinketh awhile, then falleth asleep
and leaveth me alone with none to bear me company over my cup nor
any to whom I may sing when the bowl goeth round."  Quoth the
Shaykh (and his mien unstiffened for that his soul inclined
towards her), "By Allah, this is not well!" Then she crowned a
cup and looking towards him said, "By my life thou must take and
drink it, and not refuse to heal my sick heart!"  So he put forth
his hand and took it and drank it off and she filled a second and
set it on the chandelier and said, "O master mine, there is still
this one left for thee."  "By Allah, I cannot drink it;" cried
he, "what I have already drunk is enough for me;" but she
rejoined, "By Allah, there is no help for it."  So he took the
cup and drank; and she filled him a third which he took and was
about to drink when behold, Nur al-Din rolled round and sat
upright,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

             When it was the Thirty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Nur al-Din
sat upright and said, "Ho, Shaykh Ibrahim, what is this?  Did I
not adjure thee a while ago and thou refusedst, saying, 'What I!
'tis thirteen years ago since I have done such a thing!'"  "By
Allah," quoth the Shaykh (and indeed he was abashed), "no sin of
mine this, she forced me to do it." Nur al-Din laughed and they
sat down again to wine and wassail, but the damsel turned to her
master and said in a whisper, "O my lord, drink and do not press
him, that I may show thee some sport with him."  Then she began
to fill her master's cup and he hers and so they did time after
time, till at last Shaykh Ibrahim looked at them and said, "What
fashion of good fellowship is this?  Allah curse the glutton who
keepeth the cup to himself!  Why dost thou not give me to drink,
O my brother? What manners are these, O blessed one?"  At this
the two laughed until they fell on their backs; then they drank
and gave him to drink and ceased not their carousal till a third
part of the night was past.  Then said the damsel, "O Shaykh
Ibrahim, with thy leave I will get up and light one of these
candles."  "Do so," he replied, "but light no more than one." So
she sprang to her feet and, beginning with one candle, lighted
all the eighty and sat down again.  Presently Nur al-Din said, "O
Shaykh Ibrahim, in what favour am I with thee?  May I not light
one of these lamps?" "Light one," replied he, "and bother me no
more in thy turn!"  So he rose and lighted one lamp after
another, till he had lighted the whole eight and the palace
seemed to dance with brilliancy.  Quoth the Shaykh (and indeed
intoxication had overcome him), "Ye two are bolder than I am."
Then he rose to his feet and opened all the lattices and sat down
again; and they fell to carousing and reciting verses till the
place rang with their noisy mirth.  Now Allah, the Decreer who
decreeth all things and who for every effect appointeth a cause,
had so disposed that the Caliph was at that moment sitting in the
light of the moon at one of the windows of his palace overlooking
the Tigris.  He saw the blaze of the lamps and wax candles
reflected in the river and, lifting his eyes, perceived that it
came from the Garden Palace which was all ablaze with brilliancy.
So he cried, "Here to me with Ja'afar the Barmaki!"; and the last
word was hardly spoken ere the Wazir was present before the
Commander of the Faithful, who cried at him, "O dog of a
Minister, hast thou taken from me this city of Baghdad without
saying aught to me?"  "What words are these words?" asked
Ja'afar; and the Caliph answered, "If Baghdad city were not taken
from me, the Palace of Pictures would not be illuminated with
lamps and candles, nor would its windows be thrown open.  Woe to
thee! who durst do a deed like this except the Caliphate had been
taken from me?" Quoth Ja'afar (and indeed his side-muscles
trembled as he spoke), "Who told thee that the Palace of Pictures
was illuminated and the windows thrown open?"  "Come hither and
see," replied the Caliph.  Then Ja'afar came close to the Caliph
and, looking towards the garden, saw the palace blazing with
illumination that rayed through the gloom of the night; and,
thinking that this might have been permitted by the keeper for
some reason of his own, he wished to make an excuse for him; so
quoth he, "O Commander of the Faithful, Shaykh Ibrahim said to me
last week, 'O my lord Ja'afar, I much wish to circumcise my sons
during the life of the Commander of the Faithful and thy life.' 
I asked, 'What dost thou want?'; and he answered, 'Get me leave
from the Caliph to hold the festival in the Garden Palace.' So
said I to him, 'Go circumcise them and I will see the Caliph and
tell him.'  Thereupon he went away and I forgot to let thee
know."  "O Ja'afar," said the Caliph, "thou hast committed two
offences against me; first in that thou didst no report to me,
secondly, thou didst not give him what he sought; for he came and
told thee this only as excuse to ask for some small matter of
money, to help him with the outlay; and thou gavest him nothing
nor toldest me."  "O Commander of the Faithful," said Ja'afar, "I
forgot."  "Now by the rights of my forefathers and the tombs of
my forbears," quoth the Caliph, "I will not pass the rest of this
night save in company with him; for truly he is a pious man who
frequenteth the Elders of the Faith and the Fakirs and other
religious mendicants and entertaineth them; doubtless they are
not assembled together and it may be that the prayer of one of
them will work us weal both in this world and in the next. 
Besides, my presence may profit and at any rate be pleasing to
Shaykh Ibrahim."  "O Commander of the Faithful," quoth Ja'afar,
"the greater part of the night is passed, and at this time they
will be breaking up."  Quoth the Caliph, "It matters not: I needs
must go to them."  So Ja'afar held his peace, being bewildered
and knowing not what to do.  Then the Caliph rose to his feet
and, taking with him Ja'afar and Masrur the eunuch sworder, the
three disguised themselves in merchants' gear and leaving the
City-palace, kept threading the streets till they reached the
garden. The Caliph went up to the gate and finding it wide open,
was surprised and said, "See, O Ja'afar, how Shaykh Ibrahim hath
left the gate open at this hour contrary to his custom!"  They
went in and walked on till they came under the pavilion, when the
Caliph said, "O Ja'afar, I wish to look in upon them unawares
before I show myself, that I may see what they are about and get
sight of the elders; for hitherto I have heard no sound from
them, nor even a Fakir calling upon the name of Allah. [FN#52]" 
Then he looked about and, seeing a tall walnut-tree, said to
Ja'afar, "I will climb this tree, for its branches are near the
lattices and so look in upon them."  Thereupon he mounted the
tree and ceased not climbing from branch to branch, till he
reached a bough which was right opposite one of the windows, and
here he took seat and looked inside the palace. He saw a damsel
and a youth as they were two moons (glory be to Him who created
them and fashioned them!), and by them Shaykh Ibrahim seated cup
in hand and saying, "O Princess of fair ones, drinking without
music is nothing worth; indeed I have heard a poet say,

'Round with bit and little, the bowl and cup, * Take either than
     moon [FN#53] in his sheen hath crowned:
Nor drink without music, for oft I've seen, * The horse drink
     best to the whistle's sound!'"

When the Caliph saw this, the vein of wrath started up between
his eyes and he came down and said to the Wazir, "O Ja'afar,
never beheld I yet men of piety in such case; so do thou mount
this tree and look upon them, lest the blessings of the blest be
lost to thee."  Ja'afar, hearing the words of the Commander of
the Faithful and being confounded by them, climbed to the tree-
top and looking in, saw Nur al-Din and the damsel, and Shaykh
Ibrahim holding in his hand a brimming bowl.  At this sight he
made sure of death and, descending, stood before the Commander of
the Faithful, who said to him, "O Ja'afar, praise be to Allah who
hath made us of those that observe external ordinances of Holy
Law and hath averted from us the sin of disguising ourselves
after the manner of hypocrites!" [FN#54]  But Ja'afar could not
speak a word for excess of confusion; so the Caliph looked at him
and said, "I wonder how they came hither, and who admitted them
into my pavilion!  But aught like the beauty of this youth and
this damsel my eyes never yet saw!"  "Thou sayest sooth, O our
Lord the Sultan!" replied Ja'afar (and he hoped to propitiate the
Caliph Harun al-Rashid).  Then quoth the Caliph, "O Ja'afar, let
us both mount the branch opposite the window, that we may amuse
ourselves with looking at them."  So the two climbed the tree
and, peering in, heard Shaykh Ibrahim say, "O my lady, I have
cast away all gravity mine by the drinking of wine, but 'tis not
sweet save with the soft sounds of the lute-strings it combine." 
"By Allah," replied Anis al-Jalis, "O Shaykh Ibrahim, an we had
but some instrument of music our joyance were complete."  Hearing
this he rose to his feet and the Caliph said to Ja'afar, "I
wonder what he is about to do!" and Ja'afar answered, "I know
not."  The Shaykh disappeared and presently reappeared bringing a
lute; and the Caliph took not of it and knew it for that of Abu
Ishak the Cup-companion. [FN#55]  "By Allah," said the Caliph, "if
this damsel sing ill I will crucify all of you; but if she sing
well I will forgive them and only gibbet thee."  "O Allah cause
her to sing vilely!" quoth Ja'afar. Asked the Caliph, "Why so?";
and he answered, "If thou crucify us all together, we shall keep
one another company."  The Caliph laughed at his speech. 
Presently the damsel took the lute and, after looking at it and
tuning it, she played a measure which made all hearts yearn to
her; then she sang these lines,

"O ye that can aid me, a wretched lover, * Whom longing burns nor
     can rest restore me!
Though all you have done I have well deserved, * I take refuge
     with you, so exult not o'er me:
True, I am weak and low and vile, * But I'll bear your will and
     whatso you bore me:
My death at your hands what brings it of glory? * I fear but your
     sin which of life forlore me!"

Quoth the Caliph, "By Allah, good!  O Ja'afar, never in my life
have I heard a voice so enchanting as this."  "Then haply the
Caliph's wrath hath passed away," said Ja'afar, and he replied,
"Yes, 'tis gone."  Thereupon they descended from the tree, and
the Caliph said to Ja'afar, "I wish to go in and sit with them
and hear the damsel sing before me." "O Commander of the
Faithful," replied Ja'afar, "if thou go in to them they will be
terribly troubled, and Shaykh Ibrahim will assuredly die of
fright."  But the Caliph answered, "O Ja'afar, thou must teach me
some device wherewith to delude them and whereby I can foregather
with them without their knowing me."  So they walked towards the
Tigris pondering the matter, and presently came upon a fisherman
who stood fishing under the pavilion windows.  Now some time
before this, the Caliph (being in the pavilion) had called to
Shaykh Ibrahim and asked him, "What noise is this I hear under
the windows?" and he had answered, "It is voices of fisher folk
catching fish:" so quoth the Caliph, "Go down and forbid them
this place;" and he forbade them accordingly.  However that night
a fisherman named Karim, happening to pass by and seeing the
garden gate open, said to himself, "This is a time of negligence;
and I will take advantage of it to do a bit of fishing."  So he
took his net and cast it, but he had hardly done so when behold,
the Caliph come up single-handed and, standing hard by, knew him
and called aloud to him, "Ho, Karim!"  The fisherman, hearing
himself named, turned round, and seeing the Caliph, trembled and
his side-muscles quivered, as he cried, "By Allah, O Commander of
the Faithful, I did it not in mockery of the mandate; but poverty
and a large family drove me to what thou seest!"  Quoth the
Caliph, "Make a cast in my name."  At this the fisherman was glad
and going to the bank threw his net, then waiting till it had
spread out at full stretch and settled down, hauled it up and
found in it various kinds of fish.  The Caliph was pleased and
said, "O Karim, doff thy habit."  So he put off a gaberdine of
coarse woollen stuff patched in an hundred places whereon the
lice were rampant, and a turband which had never been untwisted
for three years but to which he had sown every rag he came upon. 
The Caliph also pulled off his person two vests of Alexandrian
and Ba'lbak silk, a loose inner robe and a long-sleeved outer
coat, and said to the fisherman, "Take them and put them on,"
while he assumed the foul gaberdine and filthy turband and drew a
corner of the head-cloth as a mouth-veil [FN#56] before his face.
Then said he to the fisherman, "Get thee about thy business!; and
the man kissed the Caliph's feet and thanked him and improvised
the following couplets, 

"Thou hast granted more favours than ever I craved; * Thou hast
     satisfied needs which my heart enslaved:
I will thank thee and thank whileas life shall last, * And my
     bones will praise thee in grave engraved!"

Hardly had the fisherman ended his verse, when the lice began to
crawl over the Caliph's skin, and he fell to catching them on his
neck with his right and left and throwing them from him, while he
cried, "O fisherman, woe to thee! what be this abundance of lice
on thy gaberdine." "O my lord," replied he, "they may annoy thee
just at first, but before a week is past thou wilt not feel them
nor think of them."  The Caliph laughed and said to him, "Out on
thee!  Shall I leave this gaberdine of thine so long on my body?" 
Quoth the fisherman, "I would say a word to thee but I am ashamed
in presence of the Caliph!"; and quoth he, "Say what thou hast to
say."  "It passed through my thought, O Commander of the
Faithful," said the fisherman, "that, since thou wishest to learn
fishing so thou mayest have in hand an honest trade whereby to
gain thy livelihood, this my gaberdine besitteth thee right
well." [FN#57] The Commander of the Faithful laughed at this
speech, and the fisherman went his way.  Then the Caliph took up
the basket of fish and, strewing a little green grass over it,
carried it to Ja'afar and stood before him. Ja'afar thinking him
to be Karim the fisherman feared for him and said, "O Karim, what
brought thee hither?  Flee for thy life, for the Caliph is in the
garden to-night and, if he see thee, thy neck is gone."  At this
the Caliph laughed and Ja'afar recognized him and asked, "Can it
be thou, our lord the Sultan?"; and he answered, "Yes, O Ja'afar,
and thou art my Wazir and I and thou came hither together; yet
thou knowest me not; so how should Shaykh Ibrahim know me, and he
drunk?  Stay here, till I came back to thee."  "To hear is to
obey," said Ja'afar.  Then the Caliph went up to the door of the
pavilion and knocked a gentle knock, whereupon said Nur al-Din,"
O Shaykh Ibrahim, some one taps at the door." "Who goes there?"
cried the Shaykh and the Caliph replied, "It is I, O Shaykh
Ibrahim!"  "Who art thou," quoth he, and quoth the other, "I am
Karim the fisherman: I hear thou hast a feast, so I have brought
thee some fish, and of a truth 'tis good fish."  When Nur al-Din
heard the mention of fish, he was glad, he and the damsel, and
they both said to the Shaykh, "O our lord, open the door and let
him bring us his fish." So Shaykh Ibrahim opened and the Caliph
came in (and he in fisherman guise), and began by saluting them. 
Said Shaykh Ibrahim, "Welcome to the blackguard, the robber, the
dicer!  Let us see thy fish."  So the Caliph showed them his
catch and behold, the fishes were still alive and jumping,
whereupon the damsel exclaimed, "By Allah!  O my lord, these are
indeed fine fish: would they were fried!" and Shaykh Ibrahim
rejoined, "By Allah, O my lady, thou art right."  Then said he to
the Caliph, "O fisherman, why didst thou not bring us the fish
ready fried?  Up now and cook them and bring them back to us." 
"On my head be thy commands!" said the Caliph, "I will fry thee a
dish and bring it."  Said they, "Look sharp." Thereupon he went
and ran till he came up to Ja'afar when he called to him, "Hallo,
Ja'afar!"; and he replied, "Here am I, O Commander of the
Faithful, is all well?"  "They want the fish fried," said the
Caliph, and Ja'afar answered, "O Commander of the Faithful, give
it to me and I'll fry it for them."  "By the tombs of my
forbears," quoth the Caliph, "none shall fry it but I, with mine
own hand!"  So he went to the gardener's hut, where he searched
and found all that he required, even to salt and saffron and wild
marjoram and else besides.  Then he turned to the brasier and,
setting on the frying-pan, fried a right good fry.  When it was
done, he laid it on a banana-leaf, and gathering from the garden
wind-fallen fruits, limes and lemons, carried the fish to the
pavilion and set the dish before them.  So the youth and the
damsel and Shaykh Ibrahim came forward and ate; after which they
washed their hands and Nur al-Din said to the Caliph, "By Allah,
O fisherman, thou hast done us a right good deed this night." 
Then he put hand in pouch and, taking out three of the dinars
which Sanjar had given him, said, "O fisherman, excuse me.  By
Allah had I known thee before that which hath lately befallen me,
I had done away the bitterness of poverty from thy heart; but
take thou this as the best I can do for thee."  Then he threw the
gold pieces to the Caliph, who took them and kissed them and put
them in pouch. Now his sole object in doing all this was to hear
the damsel sing; so he said to Nur al-Din, "Thou hast rewarded me
most liberally, but I beg of thy boundless bounty that thou let
this damsel sing an air, that I may hear her." [FN#58]  So Nur al-
Din said, "O Anis al-Jalis!" and she answered "Yes!" and he
continued, "By my life, sing us something for the sake of this
fisherman who wisheth so much to hear thee." Thereupon she took
the lute and struck the strings, after she had screwed them tight
and tuned them, and sang these improvised verses,

"The fawn of a maid hent her lute in hand * And her music made us
     right mettlesome:
For her song gave hearing to ears stone-deaf, * While Brava!
     Brava! exclaimed the dumb."

Then she played again and played so ravishingly, that she charmed
their wits and burst out improvising and singing these couplets,

"You have honoured us visiting this our land, * And your
     splendour illumined the glooms that blent:
So 'tis due that for you I perfume my place * With rose-water,
     musk and the camphor-scent!"

Hereupon the Caliph was agitated, and emotion so overpowered him
that he could not command himself for excess of pleasure, and he
exclaimed, "By Allah, good! by Allah, good! by Allah,
good!" [FN#59]  Asked Nur al-Din, "O fisherman, doth this damsel
please thee?" and the Caliph answered, "Ay, by Allah!"  Whereupon
said Nur al-Din, "She is a gift to thee, a gift of the generous
who repenteth him not of his givings and who will never revoke
his gift!"  Then he sprang to his feet and, taking a loose robe,
threw it over the fisherman and bade him receive the damsel and
be gone.  But she looked at him and said, "O my lord, art thou
faring forth without farewell?  If it must be so, at least stay
till I bid thee good-bye and make known my case."  And she began
versifying in these verses, 

"When love and longing and regret are mine, * Must not this body
     show of ills a sign?
My love! say not, 'Thou soon shalt be consoled'; * When state
     speaks state none shall allay my pine.
If living man could swim upon his tears, * I first should float
     on waters of these eyne:
O thou, who in my heart infusedst thy love, * As water mingles in
     the cup with wine,
This was the fear I feared, this parting blow. * O thou whose
     love my heart-core ne'er shall tyne!
O Bin Khakan! my sought, my hope, my will, * O thou whose love
     this breast make wholly thine!
Against thy lord the King thou sinn'dst for me, * And winnedst
     exile in lands peregrine:
Allah ne'er make my lord repent my loss * To cream [FN#60] o' men
     thou gavest me, one right digne."

When she had ended her verses, Nur al-Din answered her with these
lines,

"She bade me farewell on our parting day, * And she wept in the
     fire of our bane and pains:
'What wilt thou do when fro' thee I'm gone?' * Quoth I, 'say this
     to whom life remains!'"

When the Caliph heard her saying in her verse,

   "To Karim, the cream of men thou gavest me;"

his inclination for her redoubled and it seemed a hard matter and
a grievous to part them; so quoth he to the youth, "O my lord,
truly the damsel said in her verses that thou didst transgress
against her master and him who owned her; so tell me, against
whom didst thou transgress and who is it hath a claim on thee?" 
"By Allah, O fisherman," replied Nur al-Din, "there befel me and
this damsel a wondrous tale and a marvellous matter: an 't were
graven with needle-gravers on the eye-corners it would be a
warner to whoso would be warned."  Cried the Caliph, "Wilt thou
not tell me thy story and acquaint me with thy case? Haply it may
bring thee relief, for Allah's aid is ever nearhand." "O
fisherman," said Nur al-Din, "Wilt thou hear our history in verse
or in prose?"  "Prose is a wordy thing, but verses," rejoined the
Caliph, "are pearls on string."  Then Nur al-Din bowed his head,
and made these couplets,

"O my friend! reft of rest no repose I command, * And my grief is
     redoubled in this far land:
Erst I had a father, a kinder ne'er was; * But he died and to
     Death paid the deodand:
When he went from me, every matter went wrong * Till my heart was
     nigh-broken, my nature unmanned:
He bought me a handmaid, a sweeting who shamed * A wand of the
     willow by Zephyr befanned:
I lavisht upon her mine heritage, * And spent like a nobleman
     puissant and grand:
Then to sell her compelled, my sorrow increased; * The parting
     was sore but I mote not gainstand:
Now as soon as the crier had called her, there bid * A wicked old
     fellow, a fiery brand:
So I raged with a rage that I could not restrain, * And snatched
     her from out of his hireling's hand;
When the angry curmudgeon made ready for blows, * And the fire of
     a fight kindled he and his band,
I smote him in fury with right and with left, * And his hide,
     till well satisfied, curried and tanned:
Then in fear I fled forth and lay hid in my house, * To escape
     from the snares which my foeman had spanned:
So the King of the country proclaimed my arrest; * When access to
     me a good Chamberlain fand:
And warned me to flee from the city afar, * Disappear, disappoint
     what my enemies planned:
Then we fled from our home 'neath the wing of the night, * And
     sought us a refuge by Baghdad strand:
Of my riches I've nothing on thee to bestow, * O Fisher, except
     the fair gift thou hast scanned:
The loved of my soul, and when I from her part, * Know for sure
     that I give thee the blood of my heart." [FN#61]

When he had ended his verse, the Caliph said to him, "O my lord
Nur al-Din, explain to me thy case more fully,"  So he told him
the whole story from beginning to end, and the Caliph said to
him, "Whither dost thou now intend?"  "Allah's world is wide,"
replied he.  Quoth the Caliph, "I will write thee a letter to
carry to the Sultan Mohammed bin Sulayman al-Zayni, which when he
readeth, he will not hurt nor harm thee in aught." -And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

             When it was the Thirty-eighth Night, 

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
the Caliph said to Nur al-Din Ali, "I will write thee a letter to
carry to the Sultan Mohammed bin Sulayman al-Zayni, which when he
readeth, he will not hurt nor harm thee in aught," Nur al-Din
asked "What! is there in the world a fisherman who writeth to
Kings?  Such a thing can never be!"; and the Caliph answered,
"Thou sayest sooth, but I will tell thee the reason. Know that I
and he learnt in the same school under one schoolmaster, and that
I was his monitor.  Since that time Fortune befriended him and he
is become a Sultan, while Allah hath abased me and made me a
fisherman; yet I never send to him to ask aught but he doeth my
desire; nay, though I should ask of him a thousand favours every
day, he would comply." When Nur al-Din heard this he said, "Good!
write that I may see." So the Caliph took ink-case and reed-pen
and wrote as follows,--"In the name of Allah, the
Compassionating, the Compassionate!  But after. [FN#62] This
letter is written by Harun al-Rashid, son of Al-Mahdi, to his
highness Mohammed bin Sulayman al-Zayni, whom I have encompassed
about with my favour and made my viceroy in certain of my
dominions.  The bearer of these presents is Nur al-Din Ali, son
of Fazl bin Khakan the Wazir. As soon as they come to thy hand
divest thyself forthright of the kingly dignity and invest him
therewith; so oppose not my commandment and peace be with thee." 
He gave the letter to Nur al-Din, who took it and kissed it, then
put it in his turband and set out at once on his journey. So far
concerning him; but as regards the Caliph, Shaykh Ibrahim stared
to him (and he still in fisher garb) and said, "O vilest of
fishermen, thou hast brought us a couple of fish worth a score of
half-dirhams, [FN#63] and hast gotten three dinars for them; and
thinkest thou to take the damsel to boot?"  When the Caliph heard
this, he cried out at him, and signed to Masrur who discovered
himself and rushed in upon him. Now Ja'afar had sent one of the
gardener-lads to the doorkeeper of the palace to fetch a suit of
royal raiment for the Prince of the Faithful; so the man went
and, returning with the suit, kissed the ground before the Caliph
and gave it him.  Then he threw of the clothes he had on [FN#64]
and donned kingly apparel.  Shaykh Ibrahim was still sitting upon
his chair and the Caliph tarried to behold what would come next. 
But seeing the Fisherman become the Caliph, Shaykh Ibrahim was
utterly confounded and he could do nothing but bite his finger-
ends [FN#65] and say, "Would I knew whether am I asleep or am I
awake!"  At last the Caliph looked at him and cried, "O Shaykh
Ibrahim, what state is this in which I see thee?" Thereupon he
recovered from his drunkenness and, throwing himself upon the
ground, repeated these verses,

"Pardon the sinful ways I did pursue; * Ruth from his lord to
     every slave is due:
Confession pays the fine that sin demands; * Where, then, is that
     which grace and mercy sue?" [FN#66]

The Caliph forgave him and bade carry the damsel to the city-
palace, where he set apart for her an apartment and appointed
slaves to serve her, saying to her, "Know that we have sent thy
lord to be Sultan in Bassorah and, Almighty Allah willing, we
will dispatch him the dress of investiture and thee with it." 
Meanwhile, Nur al-Din Ali ceased not travelling till he reached
Bassorah, where he repaired to the Sultan's palace and he shouted
a long shout. [FN#67]  The Sultan heard him and sent for him; and
when he came into his presence, he kissed the ground between his
hands and, producing the letter, presented it to him.  Seeing the
superscription in the writing of the Commander of the Faithful,
the Sultan rose to his feet and kissed it three times; and after
reading it said, "I hear and I obey Allah Almighty and the
Commander of the Faithful!"  Then he summoned the four
Kazis [FN#68] and the Emirs and was about to divest himself of the
rule royal, when behold, in came Al Mu'in bin Sawi.  The Sultan
gave him the Caliph's letter and he read it, then tore it to
pieces and putting it into his mouth, chewed it [FN#69] and spat
it out.  "Woe to thee," quoth the Sultan (and indeed he was sore
angered); "what induced thee to do this deed?"  "Now by thy life!
O our lord the Sultan," replied Mu'in, "this man hath never
foregathered with the Caliph nor with his Wazir; but he is a
gallows-bird, a limb of Satan, a knave who, having come upon a
written paper in the Caliph's hand, some idle scroll, hath made
it serve his own end.  The Caliph would surely not send him to
take the Sultanate from thee without the imperial
autograph [FN#70] and the diploma of investiture, and he certainly
would have despatched with him a Chamberlain or a Minister.  But
he hath come alone and he never came from the Caliph, no, never!
never! never!"  "What is to be done?" asked the Sultan, and the
Minister answered, "Leave him to me and I will take him and keep
him away from thee, and send him in charge of a Chamberlain to
Baghdad-city.  Then, if what he says be sooth, they will bring us
back autograph and investiture; and if not, I will take my due
out of this debtor."  When the Sultan heard the Minister's words
he said, "Hence with thee and him too." Al Mu'in took trust of
him from the King and, carrying him to his own house, cried out
to his pages who laid him flat and beat him till he fainted. 
Then he let put upon his feet heavy shackles and carried him to
the jail, where he called the jailor, one Kutayt, [FN#71] who came
and kissed the ground before him.  Quoth the Wazir, "O Kutayt, I
wish thee to take this fellow and throw him into one of the
underground cells [FN#72] in the prison and torture him night and
day."  "To hear is to obey," replied the jailor and, taking Nur
al-Din into the prison, locked the door upon him.  Then he gave
orders to sweep a bench behind the door and, spreading on it a
sitting-rug and a leather-cloth, seated Nur al-Din thereon and
loosed his shackles and entreated him kindly.  The Wazir sent
every day enjoining the jailor to beat him, but he abstained from
this, and so continued to do for forty days.  On the forty-first
day there came a present from the Caliph; which when the Sultan
saw, it pleased him and he consulted his Ministers on the matter,
when one of them said, "Perchance this present was for the new
Sultan."  Cried Al-Mu'in, "We should have done well had we put
him to death at his first coming;" and the Sultan cried "By
Allah, thou hast reminded me of him!  Go down to the prison and
fetch him, and I will strike off his head."  "To hear is to
obey," replied Al-Mu'in: then he stood up and said, "I will make
proclamation in the city:--Whoso would solace himself with seeing
the beheading of Nur al-Din bin al-Fazl bin Khakan, let him
repair to the palace!  So follower and followed, great and small
will flock to the spectacle, and I shall heal my heart and harm
my foe."  "Do as thou wilt," said the Sultan.  The Wazir went off
(and he was glad and gay), and ordered the Chief of Police to
make the afore-mentioned proclamation. When the people heard the
crier, they all sorrowed and wept, even the little ones at school
and the traders in their shops; and some strove to get places for
seeing the sight, whilst others went to the prison with the
object of escorting him thence.  Presently, the Wazir came with
ten Mamelukes to the jail and Kutayt the jailor asked him, "Whom
seekest thou, O our lord the Wazir?"; whereto he answered, "Bring
me out that gallows- bird."  But the jailor said, "He is in the
sorriest of plights for the much beating I have given him."  Then
he went into the prison and found Nur al-Din repeating these
verses,

"Who shall support me in calamities, * When fail all cures and
     greater cares arise?
Exile hath worm my heart, my vitals torn;   The World to foes
     hath turned my firm allies.
O folk, will not one friend amidst you all * Wail o'er my woes,
     and cry to hear my cries?
Death and it agonies seem light to me, * Since life has lost all
     joys and jollities:
O Lord of Mustafa, [FN#73] that Science-sea, * Sole Intercessor,
     Guide all-ware, all-wise!
I pray thee free me and my fault forego, * And from me drive mine
     evil and my woe."

The jailor stripped off his clean clothes and, dressing him in
two filthy vests, carried him to the Wazir.  Nur al-Din looked at
him and saw it was his foe that sought to compass his death; so
he wept and said, "Art thou, then, so secure against the World? 
Hast thou not heard the saying of the poet,

'Kisras and Caesars in a bygone day * Stored wealth; where it is,
     and ah! where are they?'

O Wazir," he continued, "know that Allah (be He extolled and
exalted!) will do whatso He will!"  "O Ali," replied he,
"thinkest thou to frighten me with such talk?  I mean this very
day to smite thy neck despite the noses of the Bassorah folk and
I care not; let the days do as they please; nor will I turn me to
thy counsel but rather to what the poet saith,

'Leave thou the days to breed their ban and bate, * And make thee
     strong t' upbear the weight of Fate.'

And also how excellently saith another,

'Whoso shall see the death-day of his foe, * One day surviving,
     wins his bestest wish.'"

Then he ordered his attendants to mount Nur al-Din upon the bare
back of a mule; and they said to the youth (for truly it was
irksome to them), "Let us stone him and cut him down thou our
lives go for it."  But Nur al-Din said to them, "Do not so: have
ye not heard the saying of the poet,

'Needs must I bear the term by Fate decreed, * And when that day
     be dead needs must I die:
If lions dragged me to their forest-lair, * Safe should I live
     till draw my death-day nigh.'"

Then they proceeded to proclaim before Nur al-Din, "This is the
least of the retribution for him who imposeth upon Kings with
forgeries."  And they ceased not parading him round about
Bassorah, till they made him stand beneath the palace-windows and
set him upon the leather of blood, [FN#74] and the sworder came up
to him and said, "O my lord, I am but a slave commanded in this
matter: an thou have any desire, tell it me that I may fulfil it,
for now there remaineth of they life only so much as may be till
the Sultan shall put his face out of the lattice."  Thereupon Nur
al-Din looked to the right and to the left, and before him and
behind him and began improvising,

"The sword, the sworder and the blood-skin waiting me I sight, *
     And cry, Alack, mine evil fate! ah, my calamity!
How is't I see no loving friend with eye of sense or soul? *
     What! no one here? I cry to all: will none reply to me?
The time is past that formed my life, my death term draweth nigh,
     * Will no man win the grace of God showing me clemency;
And look with pity on my state, and clear my dark despair, * E'en
     with a draught of water dealt to cool death's agony?"

The people fell to weeping over him; and the headsman rose and
brought him a draught of water; but the Wazir sprang up from his
place and smote the gugglet with his hand and broke it: then he
cried out at the executioner and bade him strike off Nur al-Din's
head.  So he bound the eyes of the doomed man and folk clamoured
at the Wazir and loud wailings were heard and much questioning of
man and man.  At this moment behold, rose a dense dust-cloud
filling sky and wold; and when the Sultan, who was sitting in the
palace, descried this, he said to his suite, "Go and see what yon
cloud bringeth:"  Replied Al Mu'in, "Not till we have smitten
this fellow's neck;" but the Sultan said, "Wait ye till we see
what this meaneth."  Now the dust-cloud was the dust of J'afar
the Barmecide, Wazir to the Caliph, and his host; and the cause
of his coming was as follows.  The Caliph passed thirty days
without calling to mind the matter of Nur al-Din Ali, [FN#75] and
none reminded him of it, till one night, as he passed by the
chamber of Anis al-Jalis, he heard her weeping and singing with a
soft sweet voice these lines of the poet,

"In thought I see thy form when farthest far or nearest near; *
     And on my tongue there dwells a name which man shall ne'er
     unhear."

Then her weeping redoubled; when lo! the Caliph opened the door
and, entering the chamber, found Anis al-Jalis in tears.  When
she saw him she fell to the ground and kissing his feet three
times repeated these lines,

"O fertile root and noble growth of trunk; * Ripe-fruitful branch
     of never sullied race;
I mind thee of what pact thy bounty made; * Far be 't from thee
     thou should'st forget my case!"

Quoth the Caliph, "Who art thou?" and she replied, "I am she whom
Ali bin Khakan gave thee in gift, and I wish the fulfilment of
thy promise to send me to him with the robe of honour; for I have
now been thirty days without tasting the food of sleep." 
Thereupon the Caliph sent for Ja'afar and said to him, "O
Ja'afar, 'tis thirty days since we have had news of Nur al-Din
bin Khakan, and I cannot suppose that the Sultan hath slain him;
but, by the life of my head and by the sepulchres of my
forefathers, if aught of foul play hath befallen him, I will
surely make an end of him who was the cause of it, though he be
the dearest of all men to myself! So I desire that thou set out
for Bassorah within this hour and bring me tidings of my cousin,
King Mohammed bin Sulayman al-Zayni, and how he had dealt with
Nur al-Din Ali bin Khakan;" adding, "If thou tarry longer on the
road than shall suffice for the journey, I will strike off they
head. Furthermore, do thou tell the son of my uncle the whole
story of Nur al-Din, and how I sent him with my written orders;
and if thou find, O my cousin, [FN#76] that the King hath done
otherwise than as I commanded, bring him and the Wazir Al-Mu'in
bin Sawi to us in whatsoever guise thou shalt find them." [FN#77] 
"Hearing and obedience," replied Ja'afar and, making ready on the
instant, he set out for Bassorah where the news of his coming had
foregone him and had reached to the ears of King Mohammed. When
Ja'afar arrived and saw the crushing and crowding of the lieges,
he asked, "What means all this gathering?" so they told him what
was doing in the matter of Nur al-Din; whereupon he hastened to
go to the Sultan and saluting him, acquainted him with the cause
why he came and the Caliph's resolve, in case of any foul play
having befallen the youth, to put to death whoso should have
brought it about.  Then he took into custody the King and the
Wazir and laid them in ward and, giving order for the release of
Nur al-Din Ali, enthroned him as Sultan in the stead of Mohammed
bin Sulayman.  After this Ja'afar abode three days in Bassorah,
the usual guest-time, and on the morning of the fourth day, Nur
al-Din Ali turned to him and said, "I long for the sight of the
Commander of the Faithful." Then said Ja'afar to Mohammed bin
Sulayman, "Make ready to travel, for we will say the dawn-prayer
and mount Baghdad-wards;" and he replied, "To hear is to obey." 
Then they prayed and they took horse and set out, all of them,
carrying with them the Wazir, Al-Mu'in bin Sawi, who began to
repent him of what he had done.  Nur al-Din rode by Ja'afar's
side and they stinted not faring on till they arrived at Baghdad,
the House of Peace, and going in to the Caliph told him how they
had found Nur al-Din nigh upon death.  Thereupon the Caliph said
to the youth, "Take this sword and smite with it the neck of
thine enemy."  So he took the sword from his hand and stepped up
to Al-Mu'in who looked at him and said, "I did according to my
mother's milk, do thou according to thine." [FN#78] Upon this Nur
al-Din cast the sword from his hand and said to the Caliph, "O
Commander of the Faithful, he hath beguiled me with his words;"
and he repeated this couplet,

"By craft and sleight I snared him when he came; * A few fair
     words aye trap the noble-game!"

"Leave him then," cried the Caliph and, turning to Masrur said,
"Rise thou and smite his neck."  So Masrur drew his sword and
struck off his head. Then quoth the Caliph to Nur al-Din Ali,
"Ask a boon of me."  "O my lord," answered he, "I have no need of
the Kingship of Bassorah; my sole desire is to be honoured by
serving thee and by seeing the countenance." "With love and
gladness," said the Caliph.  Then he sent for the damsel, Anis
al-Jalis, and bestowed plentiful favours upon them both and gave
them one of his palaces in Baghdad, and assigned stipends and
allowances, and made Nur al-Din Ali bin Fazl bin Khakan, one of
his cup-companions; and he abode with the Commander of the
Faithful enjoying the pleasantest of lives till death overtook
him.  "Yet (continued Shahrazad) is not his story in any wise
more wondrous than the history of the merchant and his children." 
The King asked "And what was that?" and Shahrazad began to relate
the




Tale of Ghanim bin Ayyub [FN#79], the Distraught, the Thrall o'
Love.


It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that in times of yore and
in years and ages long gone before, there lived in Damascus a
merchant among the merchants, a wealthy man who had a son like
the moon on the night of his fulness [FN#80] and withal sweet of
speech, who was named Ghanim bin 'Ayyub, surnamed the Distraught,
the Thrall o' Love. He had also a daughter, own sister to Ghanim,
who was called Fitnah, a damsel unique in beauty and loveliness.
Their father died and left them abundant wealth.--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

              When it was the Thirty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
merchant left his two children abundant wealth and amongst other
things an hundred loads [FN#81] of silks and brocades, musk pods
and mother o' pearl; and there was written on every bale, "This
is of the packages intended for Baghdad," it having been his
purpose to make the journey thither, when Almighty Allah took him
to Himself, which was in the time of the Caliph Harun al-Rashid.
After a while his son took the loads and, bidding farewell to his
mother and kindred and townsfolk, went forth with a company of
merchants, putting his trust in Allah Almighty, who decreed him
safety, so that he arrived without let or stay at Baghdad. There
he hired for himself a fair dwelling house which he furnished
with carpets and cushions, curtains and hangings; and therein
stored his bales and stabled his mules and camels, after which he
abode a while resting. Presently the merchants and notables of
Baghdad came and saluted him, after which he took a bundle
containing ten pieces of costly stuffs, with the prices written
on them, and carried it to the merchants' bazar, where they
welcomed and saluted him and showed him all honour; and, making
him dismount from his beast, seated him in the shop of the Syndic
of the market, to whom he delivered the package. He opened it
and, drawing out the pieces of stuff, sold them for him at a
profit of two diners on every diner of prime cost. At this Ghanim
rejoiced and kept selling his silks and stuffs one after another,
and ceased not to do on this wise for a full year. On the first
day of the following year he went, as was his wont, to the
Exchange which was in the bazar, but found the gate shut; and
enquiring the reason was told, "One of the merchants is dead and
all the others have gone to follow his bier, [FN#82] and why
shouldst thou not win the meed of good deeds by walking with
them?" [FN#83] He replied "Yes," and asked for the quarter where
the funeral was taking place, and one directed him thereto. So he
purified himself by the Wuzu-ablution [FN#84] and repaired with
the other merchants to the oratory, where they prayed over the
dead, then walked before the bier to the burial place, and
Ghanim, who was a bashful man, followed them being ashamed to
leave them. They presently issued from the city, and passed
through the tombs until they reached the grave where they found
that the deceased's kith and kin had pitched a tent over the tomb
and had brought thither lamps and wax candles. So they buried the
body and sat down while the readers read out and recited the
Koran over the grave; and Ghanim sat with them, being overcome
with bashfulness and saying to himself "I cannot well go away
till they do." They tarried listening to the Koranic perfection
till nightfall, when the servants set supper and
sweetmeats [FN#85] before them and they ate till they were
satisfied; then they washed their hands and again took their
places. But Ghanim's mind was preoccupied with his house and
goods, being in fear of robbers, and he said to himself, "I am a
stranger here and supposed to have money; if I pass the night
abroad the thieves will steal my money bags and my bales to
boot." So when he could no longer control his fear he arose and
left the assembly, having first asked leave to go about some
urgent business; and following the signs of the road he soon came
to the city gate. But it was midnight and he found the doors
locked and saw none going or coming nor heard aught but the
hounds baying and the wolves howling. At this he exclaimed,
"There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah! I was
in fear for my property and came back on its account, but now I
find the gate shut and I am in mortal fear for my life!" Then he
turned back and, looking out for a place where he could sleep
till morning, presently found a Santon's tomb, a square of four
walls with a date-tree in the central court and a granite
gateway. The door was wide open; so he entered and would fain
have slept, but sleep came not to him; and terror and a sense of
desolation oppressed him for that he was alone amidst the tombs.
So he rose to his feet and, opening the door, looked out and lo!
he was ware of a light afar off in the direction of the city
gate; then walking a little way towards it, he saw that it was on
the road whereby he had reached the tomb. This made him fear for
his life, so he hastily shut the door and climbed to the top of
the dale tree where he hid himself in the heart of the fronds.
The light came nearer and nearer till it was close to the tomb;
then it stopped and he saw three slaves, two bearing a chest and
one with a lanthorn, an adze and a basket containing some mortar.
When they reached the tomb, one of those who were carrying the
case said, "What aileth thee O Sawab?"; and said the other, "What
is the matter O Kafur?" [FN#86] Quoth he, "Were we not here at
supper tide and did we not leave the door open?" "Yes," replied
the other, "that is true.'' "See," said Kafur, "now it is shut
and barred." "How weak are your wits!" cried the third who bore
the adze and his name was Bukhayt, [FN#87] "know ye not that the
owners of the gardens use to come out from Baghdad and tend them
and, when evening closes upon them, they enter this place and
shut the door, for fear lest the wicked blackmen, like ourselves,
should catch them and roast 'em and eat 'em." [FN#88] "Thou sayest
sooth," said the two others, "but by Allah, however that may be,
none amongst us is weaker of wits than thou." "If ye do not
believe me," said Bukhayt, "let us enter the tomb and I will
rouse the rat for you; for I doubt not but that, when he saw the
light and us making for the place, he ran up the date tree and
hid there for fear of us." When Ghanim heard this, he said in
himself, "O curstest of slaves! May Allah not have thee in His
holy keeping for this thy craft and keenness of wit! There is no
Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the
Great! How shall I win free of these blackamoors?" Then said the
two who bore the box to him of the adze, "Swarm up the wall and
open the gate for us, O Bukhayt, for we are tired of carrying the
chest on our necks; and when thou hast opened the gate thou shalt
have one of those we catch inside, a fine fat rat which we will
fry for thee after such excellent fashion that not a speck of his
fat shall be lost." But Bukhayt answered, "I am afraid of
somewhat which my weak wits have suggested to me: we should do
better to throw the chest over the gateway; for it is our
treasure." "If we throw it 'twill break," replied they; and he
said, "I fear lest there be robbers within who murder folk and
plunder their goods, for evening is their time of entering such
places and dividing their spoil." "O thou weak o' wits," said
both the bearers of the box, "how could they ever get in
here!" [FN#89] Then they set down the chest and climbing over the
wall dropped inside and opened the gate, whilst the third slave
(he that was called Bukhayt) stood by them holding the adze, the
lanthorn and the hand basket containing the mortar. After this
they locked the gate and sat down; and presently one of them
said, "O my brethren, we are wearied with walking and with
lifting up and setting down the chest, and with unlocking and
locking the gate; and now 'tis midnight, and we have no breath
left to open a tomb and bury the box: so let us rest here two or
three hours, then rise and do the job. Meanwhile each of us shall
tell how he came to be castrated and all that befel him from
first to last, the better to pass away our time while we take our
rest." Thereupon the first, he of the lanthorn and whose name was
Bukhayt, said, "I'll tell you my tale." "Say on," replied they;
so he began as follows the

Tale of the First Eunuch, Bukhayt.

Know, O my brothers, that when I was a little one, some five
years old, I was taken home from my native country by a slave
driver who sold me to a certain Apparitor. [FN#90] My purchaser
had a daughter three years old, with whom I was brought up; and
they used to make mock of me, letting me play with her and dance
for her [FN#91] and sing to her, till I reached the age of twelve
and she that of ten; and even then they did not forbid me seeing
her. One day I went in to her and found her sitting in an inner
room, and she looked as if she had just come out of the bath
which was in the house; for she was scented with essences and
reek of aromatic woods, and her face shone like a circle of the
moon on the fourteenth night. She began to sport with me, and I
with her. Now I had just reached the age of puberty; so my
prickle stood at point, as it were a huge key. Then she threw me
on my back and, mounting astraddle on my breast, fell a wriggling
and a bucking upon me till she had uncovered my yard. When she
saw it standing with head erect, she hent it in hand and began
rubbing it upon the lips of her little slit [FN#92] outside her
petticoat trousers. Thereat hot lust stirred in me and I threw my
arms round her, while she wound hers about my neck and hugged me
to her with all her might, till, before I knew what I did, my
pizzle split up her trousers and entered her slit and did away
her maiden head. When I saw this, I ran off and took refuge with
one of my comrades. Presently her mother came in to her; and,
seeing her in this case, fainted clean away. However she managed
the matter advisedly and hid it from the girl's father out of
good will to me; nor did they cease to call to me and coax me,
till they took me from where I was. After two months had passed
by, her mother married her to a young man, a barber who used to
shave her papa, and portioned and fitted her out of her own
monies; whilst the father knew nothing of what had passed. On the
night of consummation they cut the throat of a pigeon poult and
sprinkled the blood on her shift. [FN#93] After a while they
seized me unawares and gelded me; and, when they brought her to
her bridegroom, they made me her Agha, [FN#94] her eunuch, to walk
before her wheresoever she went, whether to the bath or to her
father's house. I abode with her a long time enjoying her beauty
and loveliness by way of kissing and clipping and coupling with
her, [FN#95] till she died, and her husband and mother and father
died also; when they seized me for the Royal Treasury as being
the property of an intestate, and I found my way hither, where I
became your comrade. This, then, O my brethren, is the cause of
my cullions being cut off; and peace be with you! He ceased and
his fellow began in these words the

Tale of the Second Eunuch, Kafur.

Know, O my brothers that, when beginning service as a boy of
eight, I used to tell the slave dealers regularly and exactly one
lie every year, so that they fell out with one another, till at
last my master lost patience with me and, carrying me down to the
market, ordered the brokers to cry, "Who will buy this slave,
knowing his blemish and making allowance for it?" He did so and
they asked him, "Pray, what may be his blemish?" and he answered,
"He telleth me one single lie every year." Now a man that was a
merchant came up and said to the broker, "How much do they allow
for him with his blemish?" "They allow six hundred dirhams," he
replied; and said the other, "Thou shalt have twenty dirhams for
thyself." So he arranged between him and the slave dealer who
took the coin from him and the broker carried me to the
merchant's house and departed, after receiving his brokerage. The
trader clothed me with suitable dress, and I stayed in his
service the rest of my twelvemonth, until the new year began
happily. It was a blessed season, plenteous in the produce of the
earth, and the merchants used to feast every day at the house of
some one among them, till it was my master's turn to entertain
them in a flower garden without the city. So he and the other
merchants went to the garden, taking with them all that they
required of provaunt and else beside, and sat eating and
carousing and drinking till mid day, when my master, having need
of some matter from his home, said to me, "O slave, mount the she
mule and hie thee to the house and bring from thy mistress such
and such a thing and return quickly." I obeyed his bidding and
started for the house but, as I drew near it, I began to cry out
and shed tears, whereupon all the people of the quarter
collected, great and small; and my master's wife and daughters,
hearing the noise I was making, opened the door and asked me what
was the matter. Said I, "My master was sitting with his friends
beneath an old wall, and it fell on one and all of them; and when
I saw what had happened to them, I mounted the mule and came
hither in haste to tell you." When my master's daughters and wife
heard this, they screamed and rent their raiment and beat their
faces, whilst the neighbours came around them. Then the wife over
turned the furniture of the house, one thing upon another, and
tore down the shelves and broke the windows and the lattices and
smeared the walls with mud and indigo, saying to me, "Woe to
thee, O Kafur! come help me to tear down these cupboards and
break up these vessels and this china ware, [FN#96] and the rest
of it." So I went to her and aided her to smash all the shelves
in the house with whatever stood upon them, after which I went
round about the terrace roofs and every part of the place,
spoiling all I could and leaving no china in the house unbroken
till I had laid waste the whole, crying out the while "Well away!
my master!" Then my mistress fared forth bare faced wearing a
head kerchief and naught else, and her daughters and the children
sallied out with her, and said to me, "O Kafur, go thou before us
and show us the place where thy master lieth dead, that we may
take him from under the fallen wall and lay him on a bier and
bear him to the house and give him a fine funeral." So I went
forth before them crying out, "Slack, my master!"; and they after
me with faces and heads bare and all shrieking, "Alas! Alas for
the man!" Now there remained none in the quarter, neither man nor
woman, nor epicene, nor youth nor maid, nor child nor old trot,
but went with us smiting their faces and weeping bitterly, and I
led them leisurely through the whole city. The folk asked them
what was the matter, whereupon they told them what they had heard
from me, and all exclaimed, "There is no Majesty and there is no
Might save in Allah!" Then said one of them, "He was a personage
of consequence; so let us go to the Governor and tell him what
hath befallen him." When they told the Governor,--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

             When it was the Fortieth Night, [FN#97]

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when they
told the Governor, he rose and mounted and, taking with him
labourers, with spades and baskets, went on my track, with many
people behind him; and I ran on before them, howling and casting
dust on my head and beating my face, followed by my mistress and
her children keening for the dead. But I got ahead of them and
entered the garden before them, and when my master saw me in this
state, I smiting my face and saying, "Well away! my mistress!
Alas! Alas! Alas! who is left to take pity on me, now that my
mistress is gone? Would I had been a sacrifice for her!", he
stood aghast and his colour waxed yellow and he said to me, "What
aileth thee O Kafur! What is the matter?" "O my lord," I replied,
"when thou sentest me to the house, I found that the saloon wall
had given way and had fallen like a layer upon my mistress and
her children!" "And did not thy mistress escape?" "No, by Allah,
O my master; not one of them was saved; the first to die was my
mistress, thine elder daughter!" "And did not my younger daughter
escape?"; "No, she did not!" "And what became of the mare mule I
use to ride, is she safe?" "No, by Allah, O my master, the house
walls and the stable walls buried every living thing that was
within doors, even to the sheep and geese and poultry, so that
they all became a heap of flesh and the dogs and cats are eating
them and not one of them is left alive." "And hath not thy
master, my elder son, escaped?" "No, by Allah! not one of them
was saved, and now there is naught left of house or household,
nor even a sign of them: and, as for the sheep and geese and
hens, the cats and dogs have devoured them." When my master heard
this the light became night before his sight; his wits were dazed
and he so lost command of his senses that he could not stand firm
on his feet: he was as one struck with a sudden palsy and his
back was like to break. Then he rent his raiment and plucked out
his beard and, casting his turband from off his head, buffeted
his face till the blood ran down and he cried aloud, "Alas, my
children! Alas, my wife! Alas, my calamity! To whom ever befel
that which hath befallen me?" The merchants, his friends, also
cried aloud at his crying and wept for his weeping and tore their
clothes, being moved to pity of his case; and so my master went
out of the garden, smiting his face with such violence that from
excess of pain he staggered like one drunken with wine. As he and
the merchants came forth from the garden gate, behold, they saw a
great cloud of dust and heard a loud noise of crying and
lamentation; so they looked and lo! it was the Governor with his
attendants and the townsfolk, a world of people, who had come out
to look on, and my master's family following them, all screaming
and crying aloud and weeping exceeding sore weeping. The first to
address my owner were his wife and children; and when he saw them
he was confounded and laughed [FN#98] and said to them, "How is it
with all of you and what befel you in the house and what hath
come to pass to you?" When they saw him they exclaimed, "Praise
be to Allah for thy preservation!" and threw themselves upon him
and his children hung about him crying, "Slack, our father!
Thanks to Allah for thy safety, O our father!" And his wife said
to him, "Art thou indeed well! Laud to Allah who hath shown us
thy face in safety!" And indeed she was confounded and her reason
fled when she saw him, and she asked, "O, my lord, how didst thou
escape, thou and thy friends the merchants?"; and he answered
her, "And how fared it with thee in the house?" Quoth they, "We
were all well, whole and healthy, nor hath aught of evil befallen
us in the house, save that thy slave Kafur came to us, bareheaded
with torn garments and howling, 'Alas, the master! Alas the
master!' So we asked him, 'What tidings, O Kafur?' and he
answered 'A wall of the garden hath fallen on my master and his
friends the merchants, and they are all crushed and dead!''' "By
Allah," said my master, "he came to me but now howling, 'Alas, my
mistress! Alas, the children of the mistress!', and said, 'My
mistress and her children are all dead, every one of them!'" Then
he looked round and seeing me with my turband rent in rags round
my neck, howling and weeping with exceeding weeping and throwing
dust upon my head, he cried out at me. So I came to him and he
said, "Woe to thee, O ill omened slave! O whoreson knave! O thou
damned breed! What mischief thou hast wrought? By Allah! I will
flog thy skin from thy flesh and cut thy flesh from thy bones!" I
rejoined, "By Allah, thou canst do nothing of the kind with me, O
my lord, for thou boughtest me with my blemish; and there are
honest men to bear witness against thee that thou didst so
accepting the condition, and that thou knewest of my fault which
is to tell one lie every year. Now this is only a half lie, but
by the end of the year I will tell the other half, then will the
lie stand whole and complete." "O dog, son of a dog!", cried my
master, "O most accursed of slaves, is this all of it but a half
lie? Verily if it be a half lie 'tis a whole calamity! Get thee
from me, thou art free in the face of Allah!" "By Allah,"
rejoined I, if thou free me, I will not free thee till my year is
completed and I have told thee the half lie which is left. When
this is done, go down with me to the slave market and sell me as
thou boughtest me to whoso will buy me with my blemish; but thou
shalt not manumit me, for I have no handicraft whereby to gain my
living; [FN#99] and this my demand is a matter of law which the
doctors have laid down in the Chapter of Emancipation." [FN#100]
While we were at these words, up came the crowd of people, and
the neighbours of the quarter, men, women and children, together
with the Governor and his suite offering condolence. So my master
and the other merchants went up to him and informed him of the
adventure, and how this was but a half lie, at which all
wondered, deeming it a whole lie and a big one. And they cursed
me and reviled me, while I stood laughing and grinning at them,
till at last I asked, "How shall my master slay me when he bought
me with this my blemish?" Then my master returned home and found
his house in ruins, and it was I who had laid waste the greater
part of it, [FN#101] having broken things which were worth much
money, as also had done his wife, who said to him, "'Twas Kafur
who broke the vessels and chinaware." Thereupon his rage
redoubled and he struck hand upon hand exclaiming, "By Allah! in
my life never saw I a whoreson like this slave; and he saith this
is but a half lie! How, then, if he had told me a whole lie? He
would ruin a city, aye or even two." Then in his fury he went to
the Governor, and they gave me a neat thing in the bastinado-line
and made me eat stick till I was lost to the world and a fainting
fit came on me; and, whilst I was yet senseless, they brought the
barber who docked me and gelded me [FN#102] and cauterised the
wound. When I revived I found myself a clean eunuch with nothing
left, and my master said to me, "Even as thou hast burned my
heart for the things I held dearest, so have I burnt thy heart
for that of thy members whereby thou settest most store!" Then he
took me and sold me at a profit, for that I was become an eunuch.
And I ceased not bringing trouble upon all, wherever I was sold,
and was shifted from lord to lord and from notable to notable,
being sold and being bought, till I entered the palace of the
Commander of the Faithful. But now my spirit is broken and my
tricks are gone from me, so alas! are my ballocks. When the two
slaves heard his history, they laughed at him and chaffed him and
said, "Truly thou art skite [FN#103] and skite-son! Thou liedest
an odious lie." Then quoth they to the third slave, "Tell us thy
tale." "O sons of my uncle," quoth he, "all that ye have said is
idle: I will tell you the cause of my losing my testicles, and
indeed I deserved to lose even more, for I futtered both my
mistress and my master's eldest son and heir: but my story is a
long one and this is not the time to tell it; for the dawn, O my
cousins, draweth near and if morning come upon us with this chest
still unburied, we shall get into sore disgrace and our lives
will pay for it. So up with you and open the door and, when we
get back to the palace, I will tell you my story and the cause of
my losing my precious stones." Then he swarmed up and dropped
down from the wall inside and opened the door, so they entered
and, setting down the lantern, dug between four tombs a hole as
long as the chest and of the same breadth. Kafur plied the spade
and Sawab removed the earth by baskets full till they reached the
depth of the stature of a man; [FN#104] when they laid the chest
in the hole and threw back the earth over it: then they went
forth and shutting the door disappeared from Ghanim's eyes. When
all was quiet and he felt sure that he was left alone in the
place, his thought was busied about what the chest contained and
he said to himself, "Would that I knew the contents of that box!"
However, he waited till day broke, when morning shone and showed
her sheen: whereupon he came down from the date tree and scooped
away the earth with his hands, till the box was laid bare and
disengaged from the ground. Then he took a large stone and
hammered at the lock till he broke it and, opening the lid,
behold a young lady, a model of beauty and loveliness, clad in
the richest of garments and jewels of gold and such necklaces of
precious stones that, were the Sultan's country evened with them,
it would not pay their price. She had been drugged with Bhang,
but her bosom, rising and falling, showed that her breath had not
departed. When Ghanim saw her, he knew that some one had played
her false and hocussed her; so he pulled her out of the chest and
laid her on the ground with her face upwards. As soon as she
smelt the breeze and the air entered her nostrils, mouth and
lungs, she sneezed and choked and coughed; when there fell from
out her throat a pill of Cretan Bhang, had an elephant smelt it
he would have slept from night to night. Then she opened her eyes
and glancing around said, in sweet voice and gracious words, "Woe
to thee O wind! there is naught in thee to satisfy the thirsty,
nor aught to gratify one whose thirst is satisfied! Where is Zhar
al-Bostan?" But no one answered her, so she turned her and cried
out, "Ho Sabihah! Shajarat al-Durr! Nur al-Huda! Najmat al-Subh!
be ye awake? Shahwah, Nuzhab, Halwa, Zarifah, out on you,
speak! [FN#105]'' But no one answered; so she looked all around
and said, "Woe's me! have they entombed me in the tombs? O Thou
who knowest what man's thought enwombs and who givest
compensation on the Day of Doom, who can have brought me from
amid hanging screens and curtains veiling the Harim rooms and set
me down between four tombs?" All this while Ghanim was standing
by: then he said to her, "O my lady, here are neither screened
rooms nor palace Harims nor yet tombs; only the slave henceforth
devoted to thy love, Ghanim bin Ayyub, sent to thee by the
Omniscient One above, that all thy troubles He may remove and win
for thee every wish that cloth behove!" Then he held his peace.
She was reassured by his words and cried, "I testify that there
is no god but the God and I testify that Mohammed is the Apostle
of God!"; then she turned to Ghanim and, placing her hands before
her face, said to him in the sweetest speech, "O blessed youth,
who brought me hither? See, I am now come to myself." "O my
lady," he replied, "three slave eunuchs came here bearing this
chest;" and related to her the whole of what had befallen him,
and how evening having closed upon him had proved the cause of
her preservation, otherwise she had died smothered. [FN#106] Then
he asked her who she was and what was her story, and she
answered, "O youth, thanks be to Allah who hath cast me into the
hands of the like of thee! But now rise and put me back into the
box; then fare forth upon the road and hire the first camel
driver or muleteer thou findest to carry it to thy house. When I
am there, all will be well and I will tell thee my tale and
acquaint thee with my adventures, and great shall be thy gain by
means of me." At this he rejoiced and went outside the tomb. The
day was now dazzling bright and the firmament shone with light
and the folk had begun to circulate; so he hired a man with a
mule and, bringing him to the tomb, lifted the chest wherein he
had put the damsel and set it on the mule. Her love now engrossed
his heart and he fared homeward with her rejoicing, for that she
was a girl worth ten thousand gold pieces and her raiment and
ornaments would fetch a mint of money. As soon as he arrived at
his house he carried in the chest and opening it,--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

               When it was the Forty-first night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Ghanim
son of Ayyub arrived with the chest at his house, he opened it
and took out the young lady, who looked about her and, seeing
that the place was handsome, spread with carpets and dight with
cheerful colours and other deckings; and noting the stuffs up
piled and packed bales and other else than that, knew that he was
a substantial merchant and a man of much money. There upon she
uncovered her face and looked at him, and lo! he was a fair
youth; so when she saw him she loved him and said, "O my lord,
bring us something to eat." "On my head and mine eyes!" replied
he; and, going down to the bazar, bought a roasted lamb and a
dish of sweetmeats and with these dry fruits and wax candles,
besides wine and whatsoever was required of drinking materials,
not forgetting perfumes. With all this gear he returned to the
house; and when the damsel saw him she laughed and kissed him and
clasped his neck. Then she began caressing him, which made his
love wax hotter till it got the mastery of his heart. They ate
and drank and each had conceived the fondest affection; for
indeed the two were one in age and one in loveliness; and when
night came on Ghanim bin Ayyub, the Distraught, the Thrall o'
Love, rose and lit the wax candles and lamps till the place
blazed with light; [FN#107] after which he produced the wine
service and spread the table. Then both sat down again, he and
she, and he kept filling and giving her to drink, and she kept
filling and giving him to drink, and they played and toyed and
laughed and recited verses; whilst their joy increased and they
dove in closer love each to each (glory be to the Uniter of
Hearts!). They ceased not to carouse after this fashion till near
upon dawn when drowsiness overcame them and they slept where they
were, apart each from other, till the morning. [FN#108] Then
Ghanim arose and going to the market, bought all they required of
meat and vegetables and wine and what not, and brought them to
the house; whereupon both sat down to eat and ate their
sufficiency, when he set on wine. They drank and each played with
each, till their cheeks flushed red and their eyes took a darker
hue and Ghanim's soul longed to kiss the girl and to lie with her
and he said, "O my lady, grant me one kiss of that dear mouth:
per chance 't will quench the fire of my heart." "O Ghanim,"
replied she, "wait till I am drunk and dead to the world; then
steal a kiss of me, secretly and on such wise that I may not know
thou hast kissed me." Then she rose and taking off her upper
dress sat; in a thin shift of fine linen and a silken head
kerchief. [FN#109] At this passion inflamed Ghanim and he said to
her, "O my lady, wilt thou not vouchsafe me what I asked of
thee?" "By Allah," she replied, "that may not be thine, for there
is written upon my trouser string [FN#110] a hard word!" Thereupon
Ghanim's heart sank and desire grew on him as its object offered
difficulties; and he improvised these verses,

"I asked the author of mine ills * To heal the wound with one
     sweet kiss:
No! No! she cried, [FN#111] for ever no! * But I, soft whispering,
     urged yes:
Quoth she, Then take it by my leave, * When smiles shall pardon
     thine amiss:
By force, cried I? Nay, she replied * With love and gladness eke
     I wis.
Now ask me not what next occurred * Seek grace of God and whist
     of this!
Deem what thou wilt of us, for love * By calumnies the sweeter is
Nor after this care I one jot * Whether my foe be known or not."

Then his affection increased and love fires rose hotter in his
heart, while she refused herself to him saying, "Thou canst not
possess me." They ceased not to make love and enjoy their wine
and wassail, whilst Ghanim was drowned in the sea of love and
longing; but she redoubled in coyness and cruelty till the night
brought on the darkness and let fall on them the skirts of sleep.
Thereupon Ghanim rose and lit the lamps and wax candles and
refreshed the room and removed the table; then he took her feet
and kissed them and, finding them like fresh cream, pressed his
face [FN#112] on them and said to her, "O my lady, take pity on
one thy love hath ta'en and thine eyes hath slain; for indeed I
were heart whole but for thy bane!" And he wept somewhat. "O my
lord, and light of my eyes," quoth she, "by Allah, I love thee in
very sooth and I trust to thy truth, but I know that I may not be
thine." "And what is the obstacle?" asked he; when she answered,
"Tonight I will tell thee my tale, that thou mayst accept my
excuse." Then she threw herself upon him and winding her arms
like a necklace about his neck, kissed him and caressed him and
promised him her favours; and they ceased not playing and
laughing till love get the firmest hold upon both their hearts.
And so it continued a whole month, both passing the night on a
single carpet bed, but whenever he would enjoy her, she put him
off; whilst mutual love increased upon them and each could hardly
abstain from other. One night, as he lay by her side, and both
were warm with wine Ghanim passed his hand over her breasts and
stroked them; then he slipped it down to her waist as far as her
navel. She awoke and, sitting up, put her hand to her trousers
and finding them fast tied, once more fell asleep. Presently, he
again felt her and sliding his hand down to her trouser string,
began pulling at it, whereupon she awoke and sat upright. Ghanim
also sat up by her side and she asked him, "What dost thou want?"
"I want to lie with thee," he answered, "and that we may deal
openly and frankly with each other." Quoth she, "I must now
declare to thee my case, that thou mayst know my quality; then
will my secret be disclosed to thee and my excuse become manifest
to thee." Quoth he, "So be it!" Thereat she opened the skirt of
her shift and taking up her trouser string, said to him, "O my
lord, read what is worked on the flat of this string:" so he took
it in hand, and saw these words broidered on it in gold, "I AM
THINE, AND THOU ART MINE, O COUSIN OF THE APOSTLE!'' [FN#113] When
he read this, he withdrew his hand and said to her, "Tell me who
thou art!" "So be it," answered she; "know that I am one of the
concubines of the Commander of the Faithful, and my name is Kut
al-Kulub the Food of Hearts. I was brought up in his palace and,
when I grew to woman's estate, he looked on me and, noting what
share of beauty and loveliness the Creator had given me, loved me
with exceeding love, and assigned me a separate apartment, and
gave me ten slave girls to wait on me and all these ornaments
thou seest me wearing. On a certain day he set out for one of his
provinces, and the Lady Zubaydah came to one of the slave girls
in my service and said to her, 'I have something to require of
thee.' 'What is it, O my lady?' asked she and the Caliph's wife
answered, 'When thy mistress Kut al-Kulub is asleep, put this
piece of Bhang into her nostrils or drop it into her drink, and
thou shalt have of me as much money as will satisfy thee.' 'With
love and gladness;' replied the girl and took the Bhang from her,
being a glad woman because of the money and because aforetime she
had been one of Zubaydah's slaves. So she put the Bhang in my
drink, and when it was night drank, and the drug had no sooner
settled in my stomach than I fell to the ground, my head touching
my feet, and knew naught of my life but that I was in another
world. When her device succeeded, she bade put me in this chest,
and secretly brought in the slaves and the doorkeepers and bribed
them; and, on the night when thou wast perched upon the date
tree, she sent the blacks to do with me as thou sawest. So my
delivery was at thy hands, and thou broughtest me to this house
and hast entreated me honourably and with thy kindest. This is my
story, and I wot not what is become of the Caliph during my
absence. Know then my condition and divulge not my case." When
Ghanim heard her words and knew that she was a concubine of the
Caliph, he drew back, for awe of the Caliphate beset him, and sat
apart from her in one of the corners of the place, blaming
himself and brooding over his affair and patiencing his heart
bewildered for love of one he could not possess. Then he wept for
excess of longing, and plained him of Fortune and her injuries,
and the world and its enmities (and praise be to Him who causeth
generous hearts to be troubled with love and the beloved, and who
endoweth not the minds of the mean and miserly with so much of it
as eveneth a grain-weight!). So he began repeating,

"The lover's heart for his beloved must meet * Sad pain, and from
     her charms bear sore defeat:
What is Love's taste? They asked and answered I, * Sweet is the
     taste but ah! 'tis bitter sweet."

Thereupon Kut al-Kulub arose and took him to her bosom and kissed
him; for the love of him was firm fixed in her heart, so that she
disclosed to him her secret and all the affection she felt; and,
throwing her arms round Ghanim's neck like a collar of pearls,
kissed him again and yet again. But he held off from her in awe
of the Caliph. Then they talked together a long while (and indeed
both were drowned in the sea of their mutual love); and, as the
day broke, Ghanim rose and donned his clothes and going to the
bazar, as was his wont, took what the occasion required and
returned home. He found her weeping; but when she saw him she
checked herself and, smiling through her tears, said, "Thou hast
desolated me, O beloved of my heart. By Allah, this hour of
absence hath been to me like a year! [FN#114] I have explained to
thee my condition in the excess of my eager love for thee; so
come now near me, and forget the past and have thy will of me."
But he interrupted her crying, "I seek refuge with Allah! This
thing may never be. How shall the dog sit in the lion's stead?
What is the lord's is unlawful to the slave!" So he with-drew
from her, and sat down on a corner of the mat. Her passion for
him increased with his forbearance; so she seated herself by his
side and caroused and played with him, till the two were flushed
with wine, and she was mad for her own dishonour. Then she sang
these verses,

"The lover's heart is like to break in twain: * Till when these
     coy denials ah! till when?
O thou who fliest me sans fault of mine, * Gazelles are wont at
     times prove tame to men:
Absence, aversion, distance and disdain, * How shall young lover
     all these ills sustain?"

Thereupon Ghanim wept and she wept at his weeping, and they
ceased not drinking till nightfall, when he rose and spread two
beds, each in its place. "For whom is this second bed?" asked
she, and he answered her, "One is for me and the other is for
thee: from this night forth we must not sleep save thus, for that
which is the lord's is unlawful to the thrall." "O my master!"
cried she, "let us have done with this, for all things come to
pass by Fate and Fortune." But he refused, and the fire was
lighted in her heart and, as her longing waxed fiercer, she clung
to him and cried, "By Allah, we will not sleep save side by
side!" "Allah forefend!" he replied and prevailed against her and
lay apart till the morning, when love and longing redoubled on
her and distraction and eager thirst of passion. They abode after
this fashion three full told months, which were long and longsome
indeed, and every time she made advances to him, he would refuse
himself and say, "Whatever belongeth to the master is unlawful to
the man." Now when time waxed tiresome and tedious to her and
anguish and distress grew on her, she burst out from her
oppressed heart with these verses,

"How long, rare beauty! wilt do wrong to me? * Who was it bade
     thee not belong to me?
With outer charms thou weddest inner grace * Comprising every
     point of piquancy:
Passion thou hast infused in every heart, * From eyelids driven
     sleep by deputy:
Erst was (I wet) the spray made thin of leaf. * O Cassia spray!
     Unlief thy sin I see: [FN#115]
The hart erst hunted I: how is 't I spy * The hunter hunted (fair
     my hart!) by thee?
Wondrouser still I tell thee aye that I * Am trapped while never
     up to trap thou be!
Ne'er grant my prayer! For if I grudge thyself * To thee, I
     grudge my me more jealously
And cry so long as life belong to me, * Rare beauty how, how long
     this wrong to me?"

They abode in this state a long time, and fear kept Ghanim aloof
from her. So far concerning these two; but as regards the Lady
Zubaydah, when, in the Caliph's absence she had done this deed by
Kut al-Kulub she became perplexed, saying to herself, "What shall
I tell my cousin when he comes back and asks for her? What
possible answer can I make to him?" Then she called an old woman,
who was about her and discovered her secret to her saying, "How
shall I act seeing that Kut al-Kulub died by such untimely
death?" "O my lady," quoth the old crone, "the time of the
Caliph's return is near; so do thou send for a carpenter and bid
him make thee a figure of wood in the form of a corpse. We will
dig a grave for it midmost the palace and there bury it: then do
thou build an oratory over it and set therein lighted candles and
lamps, and order each and every in the palace to be clad in
black. [FN#116] Furthermore command thy handmaids and eunuchs as
soon as they know of the Caliph's returning from his journey, to
spread straw over the vestibule floors and, when the Commander of
the Faithful enters and asks what is the matter, let them say:--
Kut al-Kulub is dead, and may Allah abundantly compensate thee
for the loss of her! [FN#117]; and, for the high esteem in which
she was held of our mistress, she hath buried her in her own
palace. When he hears this he will weep and it shall be grievous
to him; then will he cause perfections of the Koran to be made
for her and he will watch by night at her tomb. Should he say to
himself, 'Verily Zubaydah, the daughter of my uncle, hath
compassed in her jealousy the death of Kut al-Kulub'; or, if love
longing overcome him and he bid her be taken out of her tomb,
fear thou not; for when they dig down and come to the image in
human shape he will see it shrouded in costly grave clothes; and,
if he wish to take off the winding sheet that he may look upon
her, do thou forbid him or let some other forbid him, saying,
'The sight of her nakedness is unlawful.' The fear of the world
to come will restrain him and he will believe that she is dead
and will restore the figure to its place and thank thee for thy
doings; and thus thou shalt escape, please Almighty Allah, from
this slough of despond." When the Lady Zubaydah heard her words,
she commended the counsel and gave her a dress of honour and a
large sum of money, ordering her to do all she had said. So the
old woman set about the business forthright and bade the
carpenter make her the afore said image; and, as soon as it was
finished, she brought it to the Lady Zubaydah, who shrouded it
and buried it and built a sepulchre over it, wherein they lighted
candles and lamps, and laid down carpets about the tomb. Moreover
she put on black and she spread abroad in the Harim that Kut
al-Kulub was dead. After a time the Caliph returned from his
journey and went up to the palace, thinking only of Kut al-Kulub.
He saw all the pages and eunuchs and handmaids habited in black,
at which his heart fluttered with extreme fear; and, when he went
in to the Lady Zubaydah, he found her also garbed in black. So he
asked the cause of this and they gave him tidings of the death of
Kut al-Kulub, whereon he fell a swooning. As soon as he came to
himself, he asked for her tomb, and the Lady Zubaydah said to
him, "Know, O Prince of the Faithful, that for especial honour I
have buried her in my own palace." Then he repaired in his
travelling garb [FN#118] to the tomb that he might wail over her,
and found the carpets spread and the candles and lamps lighted.
When he saw this, he thanked Zubaydah for her good deed and abode
perplexed, halting between belief and unbelief till at last
suspicion overcame him and he gave order to open the grave and
take out the body. When he saw the shroud and would have removed
it to look upon her, the fear of Allah Almighty restrained him,
and the old woman (taking advantage of the delay) said, "Restore
her to her place." Then he sent at once for Fakirs and Koran
readers, and caused perfections to be made over her tomb and sat
by the side of the grave, weeping till he fainted; and he
continued to frequent the tomb and sit there for a whole month,--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

              When it was the Forty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph
ceased not to frequent the tomb for the period of a whole month,
at the end of which time it so happened one day that he entered
the Serraglio, after dismissing the Emirs and Wazirs, and lay
down and slept awhile; and there sat at his head a slave girl
fanning him, and at his feet a second rubbing and shampooing
them. Presently he awoke and, opening his eyes, shut them again
and heard the handmaid at his head saying to her who was at his
feet, "A nice business this, O Khayzaran!" and the other answered
her "Well, O Kazib al-Ban?" [FN#119] "Verily" said the first, "our
lord knoweth naught of what hath happened and sitteth waking and
watching by a tomb wherein is only a log of wood carved by the
carpenter's art." "And Kut al-Kulub," quoth the other, "what hath
befallen her?" She replied, "Know that the Lady Zubaydah sent a
pellet of Bhang by one of the slave women who was bribed to drug
her; and when sleep overpowered her she let put her in a chest,
and ordered Sawab and Kafur and Bukhayt to throw her amongst the
tombs." "What dost thou say, O Kazib al-Ban;" asked Khayzaran,
"is not the lady Kut al-Kulub dead?" "Nay, by Allah!" she
answered "and long may her youth be saved from death! but I have
heard the Lady Zubaydah say that she is in the house of a young
merchant named Ghanim bin Ayyub of Damascus, highs the
Distraught, the Thrall o' Love; and she hath been with him these
four months, whilst our lord is weeping and watching by night at
a tomb wherein is no corpse." They kept on talking this sort of
talk, and the Caliph gave ear to their words; and, by the time
they had ceased speaking, he knew right well that the tomb was a
feint and a fraud, and that Kut al-Kulub had been in Ghanim's
house for four months. Whereupon he was angered with exceeding
anger and rising up, he summoned the Emirs of his state; and his
Wazir Ja'afar the Barmaki came also and kissed the ground between
his hands. The Caliph said to him in fury, "Go down, O Ja'afar,
with a party of armed men and ask for the house of Ghanim son of
Ayyub: fall upon it and spoil it and bring him to me with my
slave girl, Kut al-Kulub, for there is no help but that I punish
him!" "To hear is to obey," said Ja'afar; and setting out with
the Governor and the guards and a world of people, repaired to
Ghanim's house. Now about that time the youth happened to have
brought back a pot of dressed meat and was about to put forth his
hand to eat of it, he and Kut al-Kulub, when the lady, happening
to look out saw calamity surrounding the house on every side; for
the Wazir and the Governor, the night guard and the Mamelukes
with swords drawn had girt it as the white of the eye girdeth the
black. At this she knew that tidings of her had reached the
Caliph, her lord; and she made sure of ruin, and her colour paled
and her fair features changed and her favour faded. Then she
turned to Ghanim and said to him, "O my love! fly for thy life!"
"What shall I do," asked he, "and whither shall I go, seeing that
my money and means of maintenance are all in this house?"; and
she answered, "Delay not lest thou be slain and lose life as well
as wealth." "O my loved one and light of mine eyes!" he cried,
"how shall I do to get away when they have surrounded the house?"
Quoth she, "Fear not;" and, stripping off his fine clothes,
dressed him in ragged old garments, after which she took the pot
and, putting in it bits of broken bread and a saucer of
meat, [FN#120] placed the whole in a basket and setting it upon
his head said, "Go out in this guise and fear not for me who
wotteth right well what thing is in my hand for the
Caliph." [FN#121] So he went out amongst them, bearing the basket
with its contents, and the Protector vouchsafed him His
protection and he escaped the snares and perils that beset him,
by the blessing of his good conscience and pure conduct.
Meanwhile Ja'afar dismounted and entering the house, saw Kut
al-Kulub who had dressed and decked herself in splendid raiments
and ornaments and filled a chest with gold and jewellery and
precious stones and rarities and what else was light to bear and
of value rare. When she saw Ja'afar come in, she rose and,
kissing the ground before him, said, "O my lord, the Reed hath
written of old the rede which Allah decreed!'' [FN#122] "By Allah,
O my lady," answered Ja'afar, "he gave me an order to seize
Ghanim son of Ayyub;" and she rejoined, "O my lord, he made ready
his goods and set out therewith for Damascus and I know nothing
more of him; but I desire thee take charge of this chest and
deliver it to me in the Harim of the Prince of the Faithful."
"Hearing and obedience," said Ja'afar, and bade his men bear it
away to the head quarters of the Caliphate together with Kut
al-Kulub, commanding them to entreat her with honour as one in
high esteem. They did his bidding after they had wrecked and
plundered Ghanim's house. Then Ja'afar went in to the Caliph and
told him all that had happened, and he ordered Kut al-Kulub to be
lodged in a dark chamber and appointed an old women to serve her,
feeling convinced that Ghanim had debauched her and slept with
her. Then he wrote a mandate to the Emir Mohammed bin Sulayman
al-Zayni, his viceroy in Damascus, to this effect: "The instant
thou shalt receive this our letter, seize upon Ghanim bin Ayyub
and send him to us." When the missive came to the viceroy, he
kissed it and laid it on his head; then he let proclaim in the
bazars, "Whoso is desirous to plunder, away with him to the house
of Ghanim son of Ayyub." [FN#123] So they flocked thither, when
they found that Ghanim's mother and sister had built him a
tomb [FN#124] in the midst of the house and sat by it weeping for
him; whereupon they seized the two without telling them the cause
and, after spoiling the house, carried them before the viceroy.
He questioned them concerning Ghanim and both replied, "For a
year or more we have had no news of him." So they restored them
to their place. Thus far concerning them; but as regards Ghanim,
when he saw his wealth spoiled and his ruin utterest he wept over
himself till his heart well nigh brake. Then he fared on at
random till the last of the day, and hunger grew hard on him and
walking wearied him. So coming to a village he entered a
mosque [FN#125] where he sat down upon a mat and propped his back
against the wall; but presently he sank to the ground in his
extremity of famine and fatigue. There he lay till dawn, his
heart fluttering for want of food; and, owing to his sweating,
the lice [FN#126] coursed over his skin; his breath waxed fetid
and his whole condition was changed. When the villagers came to
pray the dawn prayer, they found him prostrate, ailing, hunger
lean, yet showing evident signs of former affluence. As soon as
prayers were over, they drew near him; and, understanding that he
was starved with hunger and cold, they gave him an old robe with
ragged sleeves and said to him, "O stranger, whence art thou and
what sickness is upon thee?" He opened his eyes and wept but
returned no answer; whereupon one of them, who saw that he was
starving, brought him a saucer of honey and two barley scones. He
ate a little and they sat with him till sun rise, when they went
to their work. He abode with them in this state for a month,
whilst sickness and weakliness grew upon him; and they wept for
him and, pitying his condition, took counsel with one another
upon his case and agreed to forward him to the hospital in
Baghdad. [FN#127] Meanwhile behold, two beggar women, who were
none other than Ghanim's mother and sister, [FN#128] came into the
mosque and, when he saw them, he gave them the bread that was at
his head; and they slept by his side that night but he knew them
not. Next day the villagers brought a camel and said to the
cameleer, "Set this sick man on thy beast and carry him to
Baghdad and put him down at the Spital door; so haply he may be
medicined and be healed and thou shalt have thy hire." [FN#129]
"To hear is to comply," said the man. So they brought Ghanim, who
was asleep, out of the mosque and set him, mat and all, on the
camel; and his mother and sister came out among the crowd to gaze
upon him, but they knew him not. However, after looking at him
and considering him carefully they said, "Of a truth he favours
our Ghanim, poor boy!; can this sick man be he?" Presently, he
woke and finding himself bound with ropes on a camel's back, he
began to weep and complain, [FN#130] and the village people saw
his mother and sister weeping over him, albeit they knew him not.
Then they fared forth for Baghdad, but the camel-man forewent
them and, setting Ghanim down at the Spital gate, went away with
his beast. The sick man lay there till dawn and, when the folk
began to go about the streets, they saw him and stood gazing on
him, for he had become as thin as a toothpick, till the Syndic of
the bazar came up and drove them away from him, saying, "I will
gain Paradise through this poor creature; for if they take him
into the Hospital, they will kill him in a single day." [FN#131]
Then he made his young men carry him to his house, where they
spread him a new bed with a new pillow, [FN#132] and he said to
his wife, "Tend him carefully;" and she replied, "Good! on my
head be it!" Thereupon she tucked up her sleeves and warming some
water, washed his hands, feet and body; after which she clothed
him in a robe belonging to one of her slave girls and made him
drink a cup of wine and sprinkled rose wafer over him. So he
revived and complained, and the thought of his beloved Kut
al-Kulub made his grief redouble. Thus far concerning him; but as
regards Kut al-Kulub, when the Caliph was angered against her,--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

               When it was the Forty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Caliph was angered against Kut al-Kulub, he ordered her to a dark
chamber where she abode eighty days, at the end of which the
Caliph, happening to pass on a certain day the place where she
was, heard her repeating poetry, and after she ceased reciting
her verse, saying, "O my darling, O my Ghanim! how great is thy
goodness and how chaste is thy nature! thou didst well by one who
did ill by thee and thou guardedst his honour who garred thine
become dishonour, and his Harim thou didst protect who to enslave
thee and shine did elect! But thou shalt surely stand, thou and
the Commander of the Faithful, before the Just Judge, and thou
shalt be justified of him on the Day when the Lord (to whom be
honour and glory!) shall be Kazi and the Angels of Heaven shall
be witnesses!" When the Caliph heard her com plaint, he knew that
she had been wronged and, returning to the palace, sent Masrur
the Eunuch for her. She came before him with bowed head and eyes
tearful and heart sorrowful; and he said to her, "O Kut al-Kulub,
I find thou accuses me of tyranny and oppression, and thou
avouches that I have done ill by one who did well by me. Who is
this who hath guarded my honour while I garred his become
dishonour? Who protected my Harim and whose Harim I wrecked?" "He
is Ghanim son of Ayyub," replied she, "for he never approached me
in wantonness or with lewd intent, I swear by thy munificence, O
Commander of the Faithful!" Then said the Caliph, "There is no
Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah! Ask what thou wilt
of me, O Kut al-Kulub." "O Prince of the Faithful!", answered
she, "I require of thee only my beloved Ghanim son of Ayyub." He
did as she desired, whereupon she said, "O Lord of the Moslems,
if I bring him to thy presence, wilt thou bestow me on him?"; and
he replied, "If he come into my presence, I will give thee to him
as the gift of the generous who revoketh not his largesse." "O
Prince of True Believers," quoth she, "suffer me to go and seek
him; haply Allah may unite me with him:" and quoth he, "Do even
as thou wilt." So she rejoiced and, taking with her a thousand
diners in gold, went out and visited the elders of the various
faiths and gave alms in Ghanim's name. [FN#133] Next day she
walked to the merchants' bazar and disclosed her object to the
Syndic and gave him money, saying, "Bestow this in charity to the
stranger!" On the following Friday she fared to the bazar (with
other thousand diners) and, entering the goldsmiths' and
jewellers' market street, called the Chief and presented to him a
thousand diners with these words, "Bestow this in charity to the
stranger!" The Chief looked at her (and he was the Syndic who had
taken in Ghanim) and said, "O my lady, wilt thou come to my house
and look upon a youth, a stranger I have there and see how goodly
and graceful he is?" Now the stranger was Ghanim, son of Ayyub,
but the Chief had no knowledge of him and thought him to be some
wandering pauper, some debtor whose wealth had been taken from
him, or some lover parted from his beloved. When she heard his
words her heart fluttered [FN#134] and her vitals yearned, and she
said to him, "Send with me one who shall guide me to thy house."
So he sent a little lad who brought her to the house wherein was
the head man's stranger guest and she thanked him for this. When
she reached the house, she went in and saluted the Syndic's wife,
who rose and kissed the ground between her hands, for she knew
her. Then quoth Kut al-Kulub, "Where is the sick man who is with
thee?" She wept and replied, "Here is he, O my lady; by Allah, he
is come of good folk and he beareth the signs of gentle breeding:
you see him lying on yonder bed." So she turned and looked at
him: and she saw something like him, but he was worn and wasted
till he had become lean as a toothpick, so his identity was
doubtful to her and she could not be certain that it was he. Yet
pity for him possessed her and she wept saying, "Verily the
stranger is unhappy, even though he be a prince in his own
land!"; and his case was grievous to her and her heart ached for
him, yet she knew him not to be Ghanim. Then she furnished him
with wine and medicines and she sat awhile by his head, after
which she mounted and returned to her palace and continued to
visit every bazar in quest of her lover. Meanwhile Ghanim's
mother and sister Fitnah arrived at Baghdad and met the Syndic,
who carried them to Kut al-Kulub and said to her, "O Princess of
beneficent ladies, there came to our city this day a woman and
her daughter, who are fair of favour and signs of good breeding
and dignity are apparent in them, though they be dressed in hair
cloth and have each one a wallet hanging to her neck; and their
eyes are tearful and their hearts are sorrowful. So I have
brought them to thee that thou mayst give them refuge, and rescue
them from beggary, for they are not of asker folk and, if it
please Allah, we shall enter Paradise through them." "By Allah, O
my master," cried she, "thou makest me long to see them! Where
are they?", adding, "Here with them to me!" So he bade the eunuch
bring them in; and, when she looked on them and saw that they
were both of distinguished beauty, she wept for them and said,
"By Allah, these are people of condition and show plain signs of
former opulence." "O my lady," said the Syndic's wife, "we love
the poor and the destitute, more especially as reward in Heaven
will recompense our love; and, as for these persons, haply the
oppressor hath dealt hardly with them and hath plundered their
property and harried their houses." Then Ghanim's mother and
sister wept with sore weeping, remembering their former
prosperity and contrasting it with their present poverty and
miserable condition; and their thoughts dwelt upon son and
brother, whilst Kut al-Kulub wept for their weeping; and they
said, "We beseech Allah to reunite us with him whom we desire,
and he is none other but my son named Ghanim bin Ayyud!" When Kut
al-Kulub heard this, she knew them to be the mother and sister of
her lover and wept till a swoon came over her. When she revived
she turned to them and said, "Have no fear and sorrow not, for
this day is the first of your prosperity and the last of your
adversity!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

              When it was the Forty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Kut
al-Kulub had consoled them she bade the Syndic lead them to his
house and let his wife carry them to the Hammam and dress them in
handsome clothes and take care of them and honour them with all
honour; and she gave him a sufficient sum of money. Next day, she
mounted and, riding to his house, went in to his wife who rose up
and kissed her hands and thanked her for her kindness. There she
saw Ghanim's mother and sister whom the Syndic's wife had taken
to the Hammam and clothed afresh, so that the traces of their
former condition became manifest upon them. She sat talking with
them awhile, after which she asked the wife about the sick youth
who was in her house and she replied, "He is in the same state."
Then said Kut al-Kulub, "Come, let us go and visit him." So she
arose, she and the Chief's wife and Ghanim's mother and sister,
and went in to the room where he lay and sat down near him.
Presently Ghanim bin Ayyub, the Distraught, the Thrall o' Love,
heard them mention the name of Kut al-Kulub; whereupon life
returned to him, emaciated and withered as he was and he raised
his head from the pillow and cried aloud, "O Kut al-Kulub!" She
looked at him and made certain it was he and shrieked rather than
said, "Yes, O my beloved!" "Draw near to me;" said he, and she
replied, "Surely thou art Ghanim bin Ayyub?"; and he rejoined "I
am indeed!" Hereupon a swoon came upon her; and, as soon as
Ghanim's mother and his sister Fitnah heard these words, both
cried out "O our joy'" and fainted clean away. When they all
recovered, Kut al-Kulub exclaimed "Praise be to Allah who hath
brought us together again and who hath reunited thee with thy
mother and thy sister!" And she related to him all that had
befallen her with the Caliph and said "I have made known the
truth to the Commander of the Faithful, who believed my words and
was pleased with thee; and now he desireth to see thee," adding,
"He hath given me to thee." Thereat he rejoiced with extreme joy,
when she said, "Quit not this place till I come back" and, rising
forthwith, betook herself to her palace. There she opened the
chest which she had brought from Ghanim's house and, taking out
some of the diners, gave them to the Syndic saying, "Buy with
this money for each of them four complete suits of the finest
stuffs and twenty kerchiefs, and else beside of whatsoever they
require;" after which she carried all three to the baths and had
them washed and bathed and made ready for them consommes, and
galangale-water and cider against their coming out. When they
left the Hammam, they put on the new clothes, and she abode with
them three days feeding them with chicken meats and bouillis, and
making them drink sherbert of sugar candy. After three days their
spirits returned; and she carried them again to the baths, and
when they came out and had changed their raiment, she led them
back to the Syndic's house and left them there, whilst she
returned to the palace and craved permission to see the Caliph.
When he ordered her to come in, she entered and, kissing the
ground between his hands, told him the whole story and how her
lord, Ghanim bin Ayyub, yclept the Distraught, the Thrall o'
Love, and his mother and sister were now in Baghdad. When the
Caliph heard this, he turned to the eunuchs and said, "Here with
Ghanim to me." So Ja'afar went to fetch him; but Kut al-Kulub
forewent him and told Ghanim, "The Caliph hath sent to fetch thee
before him," and charged him to show readiness of tongue and
firmness of heart and sweetness of speech. Then she robed him in
a sumptuous dress and gave him diners in plenty, saying, "Be
lavish of largesse to the Caliph's household as thou goest in to
him." Presently Ja'afar, mounted on his Nubian mule, came to
fetch him; and Ghanim advanced to welcome the Wazir and, wishing
him long life, kissed the ground before him. Now the star of his
good fortune had risen and shone brightly; and Ja'afar took him;
and they ceased not faring together, he and the Minister, till
they went in to the Commander of the Faithful. When he stood in
the presence, he looked at the Wazirs and Emirs and Chamberlains,
and Viceroys and Grandees and Captains, and then at the Caliph.
Hereupon he sweetened his speech and his eloquence and, bowing
his head to the ground, broke out in these extempore couplets,

"May that Monarch's life span a mighty span, * Whose lavish of
     largesse all Empyrean! lieges scan:
None other but he shall be Kaysar highs, * Lord of lordly hall
     and of haught Divan:
Kings lay their gems on his threshold-dust * As they bow and
     salam to the mighty man;
And his glances foil them and all recoil, * Bowing beards aground
     and with faces wan:
Yet they gain the profit of royal grace, * The rank and station
     of high
Earth's plain is scant for thy world of men, * Camp there in Kay
     wan's [FN#135] Empyrean!
May the King of Kings ever hold thee dear; * Be counsel shine and
     right steadfast plan
Till thy justice spread o'er the wide spread earth * And the near
     and the far be of equal worth."

When he ended his improvisation the Caliph was pleased by it and
marvelled at the eloquence of his tongue and the sweetness of his
speech,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

               When it was the Forty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph,
after marvelling at his eloquence of tongue and sweetness of
speech, said to him, "Draw near to me." So he drew near and quoth
the King, "Tell me thy tale and declare to me thy case." So
Ghanim sat down and related to him what had befallen him in
Baghdad, of his sleeping in the tomb and of his opening the chest
after the three slaves had departed, and informed him, in short,
of everything that had happened to him from commencement to
conclusion none of which we will repeat for interest fails in
twice told tales. The Caliph was convinced that he was a true
man; so he invested him with a dress of honour, and placed him
near himself in token of favour, and said to him, "Acquit me of
the responsibility I have incurred.'' [FN#136] And Ghanim so did,
saying, "O our lord the Sultan, of a truth thy slave and all
things his two hands own are his master's." The Caliph was
pleased at this and gave orders to set apart a palace for him and
assigned to him pay and allowances, rations and donations, which
amounted to something immense. So he removed thither with sister
and mother; after which the Caliph, hearing that his sister
Fitnah was in beauty a very "fitnah," [FN#137] a mere seduction,
demanded her in marriage of Ghanim who replied, "She is thy
handmaid as I am thy slave." The Caliph thanked him and gave him
an hundred thousand diners, then summoned the witnesses and the
Kazi, and on one and the same day they wrote out the two
contracts of marriage between the Caliph and Fitnah and between
Ghanim bin Ayyub and Kut al-Kulub; and the two marriages were
consummated on one and the same night. When it was morning, the
Caliph gave orders to record the history of what had befallen
Ghanim from first to last and to deposit it in the royal muniment
rooms, that those who came after him might read it and marvel at
the dealings of Destiny and put their trust in Him who created
the night and the day. Yet, O auspicious King, this story to
which thou hast deigned give ear is on no wise more wondrous than
the




     Tale Of King Omar Bin Al-Nu'uman And His Sons Sharrkan
                       And Zau Al-Makan,


 And What Befel Them of Things Seld-Seen and Peregrine. [FN#138]



The King asked her, "And what was their story?" and she answered:
It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that there was in the City
of Safety, Baghdad, before the Caliphate of Abd al-Malik bin
Marwan, [FN#139] a King, Omar bin al-Nu'uman highs, who was of the
mighty giants and had subjected the Chosroes of Persia and the
Kaysars of Eastern Rome; for none could warm himself at his
fire; [FN#140] nor could any avail to meet him in the field of
foray and fray; and, when he was angered, there came forth from
his nostrils sparks of flame.  He had made himself King over all
quarters, and Allah had subjected to him all His creatures; his
word went forth to all great cities and his hosts had harried the
farthest lands.  East and West had come under his command with
whatsoever regions lay interspersed between them, Hind and Sind
and Sin, [FN#141] the Holy Land, Al-Hijaz, the rich mountains of
Al-Yaman and the archipelagos of India and China.  Moreover, he
reigned supreme over the north country and Diyar Bakr, or
Mesopotamia, and over Sudan, the Eastern Negro land and the
Islands of the Ocean, and all the far famed rivers of the earth,
Sayhun and Jayhun, [FN#142] Nile and Euphrates.  He sent envoys
and ambassadors to capitals the most remote, to provide him with
true report; and they would bring back tidings of justice and
peace, with assurance of loyalty and obedience and of prayers in
the pulpits for King Omar bin al-Nu'uman; for he was, O Ruler of
the Age, a right noble King; and there came to him presents of
rarities and toll and tribute from all lands of his governing. 
This mighty monarch had a son yclept Sharrkan, [FN#143] who was
likest of all men to his father and who proved himself one of the
prodigies of his time for subduing the brave and bringing his
contemporaries to bane and ban.  For this his father loved him
with love so great none could be greater, and made him heir to
the kingdom after himself.  This Prince grew up till he reached
man's estate and was twenty years old, and Allah subjected His
servants to him, by reason of his great might and prowess in
battle.  Now his father, King Omar, had four wives legally
married, but Allah had vouchsafed him no son by them, save
Sharrkan, whom he had begotten upon one of them, and the rest
were barren.  Moreover he had three hundred and sixty concubines,
after the number of days in the Coptic year, who were of all
nations; and he had furnished for each and every a private
chamber within his own palace.  For he had built twelve
pavilions, after the number of the months, each containing thirty
private chambers, which thus numbered three hundred and three
score, wherein he lodged his handmaids: and he appointed
according to law for each one her night, when he lay with her and
came not again to her for a full year; [FN#144] and on this wise
he abode for a length of time.  Meanwhile his son Sharrkan was
making himself renowned in all quarters of the world and his
father was proud of him and his might waxed and grew mightier; so
that he passed all bounds and bore himself masterfully and took
by storm castles and cities.  Presently, by decree of the
Decreer, a handmaid among the handmaids of Omar bin Nu'uman
became pregnant; and, her pregnancy being announced to the Harim,
the King was informed thereof; whereupon he rejoiced with
exceeding joy and said, "Haply it will be a son, and so all my
offspring will be males!" Then he documented the date of her
conception and entreated her with all manner of kindness.  But
when the tidings came to Sharrkan, he was troubled and the matter
seemed to him a sore one and a grievous; and he said, "Verily one
cometh who shall dispute with me the sovereignty:" so quoth he to
himself, "If this concubine bear a male child I will kill it:"
but he kept that intention hidden in his heart.  Such was the
case with Sharrkan; but what happened in the matter of the damsel
was as follows.  She was a Roumiyah, a Greek girl, by name
Sofiyah or Sophia, [FN#145] whom the King of Roum and Lord of
Caesarea had sent to King Omar as a present, together with great
store of gifts and of rarities: she was the fairest of favour and
loveliest of all his handmaids and the most regardful of her
honour; and she was gifted with a wit as penetrating as her
presence was fascinating.  Now she had served the King on the
night of his sleeping with her, saying to him, "O King!  I desire
of the God of the Heavens that he bless thee this night with a
male child by me, so I may bring him up with the best of rearing,
and enable him to reach man's estate perfect in intelligence,
good manners and prudent bearing" [FN#146]--a speech which much
pleased the King.  During her pregnancy she was instant in
prayer, fervently supplicating the Lord to bless her with a
goodly male child and make his birth easy to her; and Allah heard
her petition so that after her months were accomplished she sat
safely upon the birth stool. [FN#147]  Now the King had deputed a
eunuch to let him know if the child she should bring forth were
male or female; and in like way his son Sharrkan had sent one to
bring him tidings of the same.  In due time Sophia was delivered
of a child, which the midwives examined and found to be a girl
with a face sheenier than the moon.  So they announced this to
all present in the room, whereupon the King's messenger carried
the news to him; and Sharrkan's eunuch did the like with his
master who rejoiced with exceeding joy.  But, after the two had
departed, quoth Sophia to the midwives, "Wait with me awhile, for
I feel as if there were still somewhat in my womb." Then she
cried out and the pains of child bed again took her; and Allah
made it easy to her and she gave birth to a second child.  The
wise women looked at it and found it a boy like the full moon,
with forehead flower white, and cheek ruddy bright with rosy
light; whereupon the mother rejoiced, as did the eunuchs and
attendants and all the company; and Sophia was delivered of the
after birth whilst all in the palace sent forth the trill of
joy. [FN#148]  The rest of the concubines heard it and envied her
lot; and the tidings reached Omar son of Al- Nu'uman, who was
glad and rejoiced at the excellent news.  Then he rose and went
to her and kissed her head, after which he looked at the boy;
and, bending over him, kissed him, whilst the damsels struck the
tabors and played on instruments of music; and the King gave
order that the boy should be named Zau al-Makan and his sister
Nuzhat al-Zaman. [FN#149]  They answered "Hearing and obedience,"
and did his bidding; so he appointed wet nurses and dry nurses
and eunuchs and attendants to serve them; and assigned them
rations of sugar and diet drinks and unguents and else beside,
beyond the power of tongue to rehearse.  Moreover the people of
Baghdad, hearing that Allah had blessed their King with issue,
decorated the city and made proclamation of the glad tidings with
drum and tom tom; and the Emirs and Wazirs and high dignitaries
came to the palace and wished King Omar bin al-Nu'uman joy of his
son, Zau al-Makan, and of his daughter Nuzhat al-Zaman, wherefore
he thanked them and bestowed on them dresses of honour and
further favoured them with gifts, and dealt largesse to all,
gentle and simple, who were present.  After this fashion he did
for four days full told, and he lavished upon Sophia raiment and
ornaments and great store of wealth; and, every few days he would
send a messenger to ask after her and the new-borns.  And when
four years had gone by, he provided her with the wherewithal to
rear the two children carefully and educate them with the best of
instructions.  All this while his son Sharrkan knew not that a
male child had been born to his father, Omar son of Al-Nu'uman,
having news only that he had been blessed with the birth of
Nuzhat al-Zaman; and they hid the intelligence from him, until
days and years had sped by, whilst he was busied in battling with
the brave and fighting single handed against the knights.  One
day, as King Omar was sitting in his palace, his Chamberlains
came in to him and, kissing the ground before him, said, "O King
there be come Ambassadors from the King of Roum, Lord of
Constantinople the Great, and they desire admission to thee and
submission to thy decree: if the King commend us to introduce
them we will so do; and, if not, there is no disputing his
behest." He bade them enter and, when they came in, he turned to
them and, courteously receiving them, asked them of their case,
and what was the cause of their coming.  They kissed the ground
before him and said, "O King glorious and strong!  O lord of the
arm that is long!  know that he who despatched us to thee is King
Afridun, [FN#150] Lord of Ionia land [FN#151] and of the Nazarene
armies, the sovereign who is firmly established in the empery of
Constantinople, to acquaint thee that he is now waging fierce war
and fell with a tyrant and a rebel, the Prince of Casarea; and
the cause of this war is as follows.  One of the Kings of the
Arabs in past time, during certain of his conquests, chanced upon
a hoard of the time of Alexander, [FN#152] whence he removed
wealth past compute; and, amongst other things, three round
jewels, big as ostrich eggs, from a mine of pure white gems whose
like was never seen by man.  Upon each were graven characts in
Ionian characters, and they have many virtues and properties,
amongst the rest that if one of these jewels be hung round the
neck of a new-born child, no evil shall befal him and he shall
neither wail, nor shall fever ail him as long as the jewel remain
without fail. [FN#153] When the Arab King laid hands upon them and
learned their secrets, he sent to King Afridun presents of
certain rarities and amongst them the three jewels afore
mentioned; and he equipped for the mission two ships, one bearing
the treasure and the other men of might to guard it from any who
might offer hindrance on the high seas, albeit well assured that
none would dare waylay his vessels, for that he was King of the
Arabs, and more by token that their course lay over waters
subject to the King of Constantinople and they were bound to his
port; nor were there on the shores of that sea any save the
subjects of the Great King, Afridun.  The two ships set out and
voyaged till they drew near our city, when there sallied out on
them certain corsairs from that country and amongst them troops
from the Prince of Caesarea, who took all the treasures and
rarities in the ships, together with the three jewels, and slew
the crews.  When our King heard of this, he sent an army against
them, but they routed it; then he marched a second and a stronger
but they put this also to flight,--whereupon the King waxed wroth
and swore that he would not go forth [FN#154] against them save in
his own person at the head of his whole army; nor would he turn
back from them till he had left Caesarea, of Armenia [FN#155] in
ruins and had laid waste all the lands and cities over which her
Prince held sway.  So he sent us to the Lord of the age and the
time, Sultan Omar bin al-Nu'uman, King of Baghdad and of
Khorasan, desiring that he aid us with an army, so may honour and
glory accrue to him; and he hath also forwarded by us somewhat of
various kinds of presents, and of the King's grace he beggeth
their acceptance and the friendly boon of furtherance." Then the
Ambassadors kissed the ground before him,--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

               When it was the Forty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that, after the
Ambassadors and retinue from the Constantinopolitan King had
kissed the ground before Omar and had delivered their embassage,
they brought out the presents, which were fifty damsels of the
choicest from Graecia-land, and fifty Mamelukes in tunics of
brocade, belted with girdles of gold and silver, each wearing in
his ears hoops of gold with pendants of fine pearls costing a
thousand ducats every one.  The girls were adorned in like
fashion and were clad in stuffs worth a treasury of money.  When
the King saw them, he rejoiced in them and accepted them; then he
bade the Ambassadors be honourably entreated and, summoning his
Wazirs, took counsel with them of what he should do.  Herewith
rose up among them a Wazir, an ancient man, Dandan [FN#156] highs,
who kissed the ground before Omar and said, "O King, there is
nothing better to do in this matter than equip an army valiant
and victorious, and set over it thy son Sharrkan with us as his
lieutenants; and this rede commendeth itself to me on two counts;
first, because the King of Roum hath invoked thine assistance and
hath sent thee gifts which thou hast accepted; and, secondly,
because while no enemy dareth attack our country, thine army may
go forth safely and, should it succour the King of Graecia-land
and defeat his foe, the glory will be thine.  Moreover, the news
of it will be noised abroad in all cities and countries and
especially, when the tidings shall reach the Islands of the Ocean
and the Kings of Mauritania shall hear it, they will send thee
offerings of rarities and pay thee tribute of money." The King
pleased by the Wazir's words and approving his rede, gave him a
dress of honour and said to him, "Of the like of thee should
Kings ask counsel, and it seemeth fit that thou shouldst conduct
the van of our army and our son Sharrkan command the main
battle." Then he sent for his son who came and kissed ground
before him and sat down; and he expounded to him the matter,
telling him what the Ambassadors and the Wazir Dandan had said,
and he charged him to take arms and equip himself for the
campaign, enjoining him not to gainsay Dandan in aught he should
do.  Moreover, he ordered him to pick out of his army ten
thousand horsemen, armed cap-a-pie and inured to onset and stress
of war.  Accordingly, Sharrkan arose on the instant, and chose
out a myriad of horsemen, after which he entered his palace and
mustered his host and distributed largesse to them, saying, "Ye
have delay of three days." They kissed the earth before him in
obedience to his commands and began at once to lay in munitions,
and provide provisions for the occasion; whilst Sharrkan repaired
to the armouries and took therefrom whatsoever he required of
arms and armour, and thence to the stable where he chose horses
of choice blood and others.  When the appointed three days were
ended, the army drew out to the suburbs of Baghdad city; [FN#157]
and King Omar came forth to take leave of his son who kissed the
ground before him and received from the King seven parcels of
money. [FN#158] Then he turned to Danden and commended to his care
the army of his son; and the Wazir kissed the ground before him
and answered, "I hear and I obey;" and lastly he charged Sharrkan
that he should consult the Wazir on all occasions, which he
promised to do.  After this, the King returned to his city and
Sharrkan ordered the officers to muster their troops in battle
array.  So they mustered them and their number was ten thousand
horsemen, besides footmen and camp followers.  Then they loaded
their baggage on their beasts and the war drums beat and the
trumpets blared and the bannerols and standards were unfurled,
whilst Sharrkan mounted horse, with the Wazir Dandan by his side,
and the colours fluttering over their heads.  So the host fared
forth and stinted not faring, with the ambassadors preceding
them, till day departed and night drew nigh, when they alighted
and encamped for the night.  And as soon as Allah caused the morn
tomorrow, they mounted and tried on, guided by the Ambassadors,
for a space of twenty days; and by the night of the twenty first
they came to a fine and spacious Wady well grown with trees and
shrubbery.  Here Sharrkan ordered them to alight and commanded a
three days' halt, so they dismounted and pitched their tents,
spreading their camp over the right and the left slopes of the
extensive valley, whilst the Wazir Dandan and the Ambassadors of
King Afridun pitched in the sole of the Wady. [FN#159]  As for
Sharrkan, he tarried behind them for awhile till all had
dismounted and had dispersed themselves over the valley sides; he
then slacked the reins of his steed, being minded to explore the
Wady and to mount guard in his own person, because of his
father's charge and owing to the fact that they were on the
frontier of Graecia land and in the enemy's country.  So he rode
out alone after ordering his armed slaves and his body guard to
camp near the Wazir Dandan, and he fared on along the side of the
valley till a fourth part of the night was passed, when he felt
tired and drowsiness overcame him, so that he could no longer
urge horse with heel.  Now he was accustomed to take rest on
horseback; so when slumber overpowered him, he slept and the
steed ceased not going on with him till half the night was spent
and entered one of the thickets [FN#160] which was dense with
growth; but Sharrkan awoke not until his horse stumbled over
wooded ground.  Then he started from sleep and found himself
among the trees, and the moon arose and shone brightly over the
two horizons, Eastern and Western.  He was startled when he found
himself alone in this place and said the say which ne'er yet
shamed its sayer, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might save
in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!" But as he rode on, in fear of
wild beasts, behold, the moon spread her glad light over a meadow
as if it were of the meads of Paradise; and he heard pleasant
voices and a loud noise of talk and laughter captivating the
senses of men.  So King Sharrkan alighted and, tying his steed to
one of the trees, went over a little way till he came upon a
stream and heard a woman talking in Arabic and saying, "Now by
the crush of the Messiah, this is not well of you! but whose
utters a word, I will throw her and truss her up with her own
girdle [FN#161]!"  He kept walking in the direction of the sound
and when he reached the further side he looked and behold, a
stream was gushing and flowing, and antelopes at large were
frisking and roving, and wild cattle amid the pasture moving, and
birds expressed joy and gladness in their divers tongues, and
that place was purfled with all manner flowers and green herbs,
even as a poet described it in these couplets,

"Most beautiful is earth in budding bloom, * When lucid waters
     course through plain and wood:
No work but His th' All great, th' All glorious, * Giver of all
     gifts, Giver of all good!"

And as Sharrkan considered the place, he saw in it a Christian
Monastery within whose enceinte a castle towered high in air
catching the light of the moon. [FN#162] Through the midst of the
convent passed a stream, the water flowing amongst its gardens;
and upon the bank sat the woman whose voice he had heard, while
before her stood ten handmaids like moons and wearing various
sorts of raiment and ornaments that dazed and dazzled the
beholder, high bosomed virgins, as saith of them the poet in
these couplets,

"The mead is bright with what is on't * Of merry maidens
     debonnair:
Double its beauty and its grace * Those trooping damsels slender-
    fair:
Virgins of graceful swimming gait * Ready with eye and lip to
     ensnare;
And like the tendril'd vine they loose * The rich profusion of
     their hair:
Shooting their shafts and arrows from * Beautiful eyes beyond
     compare;
Overpowering and transpiercing * Every froward adversaire."

Sharrkan gazed upon the ten girls and saw in their midst a lady
like the moon at fullest, with ringleted hair and forehead sheeny
white, and eyes wondrous wide and black and bright, and temple
locks like the scorpion's tail; and she was perfect in essence
and attributes, as the poet said of her in these couplets,

"She beamed on my sight with a wondrous glance, * And her
     straight slender stature enshamed the lance:
She burst on my sight with cheeks rosy red, * Where all manner of
     beauties have habitance:
And the locks on her forehead were lowering as night * Whence
     issues a dawn tide of happiest chance."

Then Sharrkan heard her say to the handmaids, "Come ye on, that I
may wrestle with you and gravel you, ere the moon set and the
dawn break!" So each came up to her in turn and she grounded them
forthright, and pinioned them with their girdles, and ceased not
wrestling and pitching them until she had overthrown one and all. 
Then there turned to her an old woman who was before her, and the
beldam said as in wrath, "O strumpet, cost thou glory in
grounding these girls?  Behold I am an old woman, yet have I
thrown them forty times!  So what hast thou to boast of?  But if
thou have the strength to wrestle with me, stand up that I may
grip thee and set thy head between thy heels!" The young lady
smiled at her words, but she was filled with inward wrath, and
she jumped up and asked, "O my lady Zat al-Dawahi, [FN#163] by the
truth of the Messiah, wilt thou wrestle with me in very deed, or
dost thou jest with me?"; and she answered, "Yea,"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

              When it was the Forty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
young lady asked Zat al-Dawahi, "By the truth of the Messiah,
wilt wrestle with me or dost jest?", and she answered, "Yea, I
will wrestle with thee in very deed" (Sharrkan looking on the
while), the damsel cried, "Rise up for the fall an thou have
spunk so to do." When the old woman heard this, she raged with
exceeding rage, and her body hair stood on end like the bristles
of a fretful hedgehog. [FN#164] Then she sprang to her feet,
whilst the damsel stood up to her, and said, "Now by the truth of
the Messiah, I will not wrestle with thee unless I be naked,
Mistress whore!" [FN#165] So she loosed her petticoat trousers
and, putting her hand under her clothes, tore them off her body;
then twisted up a silken kerchief into cord shape, girt it round
her middle and became as she were a scald head If ritah or a
spotted snake.  With this she inclined towards the damsel and
said, "Do thou as I have done." All this time, Sharrkan was
gazing at the twain, and laughing at the beldam's loathly
semblance.  So the damsel leisurely rose and, taking a sash of
Yamani stuff, passed it twice round her waist, then she tucked up
her trousers and displayed two calves of alabaster carrying a
mound of crystal, smooth and rounded, and a stomach which exhaled
musk from its dimples, as it were a bed of Nu'uman's anemones;
and breasts like double pomegranates.  Then the old woman leant
towards her, and the two laid hold either of each, while Sharrkan
raised his head Heavenwards and prayed Allah that the belle might
beat the beldam.  Presently the young woman get beneath the old
woman; and, gripping her waist cloth with the left and circling
her neck with the right hand, hoisted her off the ground with
both; whereupon the old woman strove to free herself and, in so
doing fell on her back arsiversy, with her legs high in air and
her hairy bush between them showed manifest in the moonshine;
furthermore she let fly two great farts [FN#166] one of which blew
up the dust from the earth's face and the other steamed up to the
gate of Heaven.  Sharrkan laughed till he fell back upon the
ground.  Then he arose and, baring his brand looked right and
left, but he saw no one save the old woman sprawling on her back,
and said to himself, "He lied not who named thee Lady of
Calamities!  Verily thou knewest her prowess by her performance
upon the others." So he drew near them to hear what should pass
between them.  Then the young lady went up to the old one and,
throwing a wrapper of thin silk upon her nakedness, helped her to
don her clothes and made excuses saying, "O my lady Zat al-
Dawahi, I intended only to throw thee and not all this, but thou
triedst to twist out of my hands; so laud to Allah for safety!"
She returned her no answer, but rose in her shame and walked away
till out of sight, leaving the handmaids prostrate and pinioned,
with the fair damsel standing amongst them.  Quoth Sharrkan to
himself, "Every luck hath its cause.  Sleep did not fall upon me
nor the war horse bear me hither save for my good fortune; for
doubtless this maid and what is with her shall become booty to
me." So he made towards his steed and mounted and heeled [FN#167]
him on, when he sped as the shaft speeds from the bow and in his
hand he still hent his brand bare of sheath, which he brandished
shouting the while his war cry, "Allah is All mighty [FN#168]!"
When the damsel saw him she sprang to her feet and, taking firm
stand on the bank of the stream, whose breadth was six ells, the
normal cubits, made one bound and landed clear on the farther
side, [FN#169] where she turned and cried out with a loud voice,
"Who art thou, O thou fellow, that breakest in upon our privacy
and pastime, and that too hanger in hand as if charging a host? 
Whence camest thou and whither art thou going?  Speak sooth, for
truth will stand thee in good stead, and lie not, for lies come
of villein breed Doubtless thou hast wandered this night from thy
way, that thou chancedst upon this place whence escape were the
greatest of mercies; for thou art now in an open plain and, did
we shout but a single shout, would come to our rescue four
thousand knights. [FN#170] So tell me what thou wantest; and if
thou wouldst only have us set thee on the right road, we will do
so." When Sharrkan heard her words he replied, "I am a stranger
of the Moslems, who fared forth this night single handed, seeking
for spoil; nor could this moonlight show me a fairer booty than
these ten maidens; so I shall seize them and rejoin my comrades
with them." Quoth she, "I would have thee know that as for the
booty thou hast not come at it; and, as for the handmaids, by
Allah, they shall never be thy spoil.  Have I not told thee that
to lie is villein vile?" Quoth he, "The wise man is he who taketh
warning by others." Thereupon quoth she, "By the truth of the
Messiah, did I not fear that thy death would be on my hands, I
would shout a shout should fill the mead for thee with war steeds
and with men of might, but I take pity upon the stranger.  So, if
thou seek booty, I require of thee that thou alight from thy
steed and swear to me, by thy faith, that thou wilt not advance
against me aught like arms in hand, and we will wrestle, I and
thou.  If thou throw me, set me on thy steed and take all of us
to thy booty; but if I throw thee, thou shalt become under my
command.  Swear this to me, for I fear thy treachery: indeed it
hath become a common saw, 'Where Perfidy is innate there Trust is
a weakly mate.' Now an thou wilt swear I will return and draw
near to thee and tackle thee." Answered Sharrkan (and indeed he
lusted to seize her and said in his soul, "Truly she knoweth not
that I am a champion of champions"); "Swear me by what oath thou
wilt and by what thou deemest most binding, and I will not
approach thee with aught till thou hast made thy preparation and
sayest, 'Draw near that I wrestle with thee.' If thou throw me, I
have money where withal to ransom myself; and if I throw thee,
'twill be booty and booty enough for me!" Rejoined the damsel, "I
am content herewith!" and Sharrkan was astounded at her words and
said, "And by the truth of the Apostle (whom Allah bless and
keep!) I too am content on the other part!" Then said she, "Swear
to me by Him who sprite in body dight and dealt laws to rule man
kind aright, that thou wilt not offer me aught of violence save
by way of wrestling; else mayst thou die without the pale of Al-
Islam." Sharrkan replied, "By Allah!  were a Kazi to swear me,
even though he were a Kazi of the Kazis, [FN#171] he would not
impose upon me such an oath as this!" Then he sware to her by all
she named and tied his steed to a tree; but he was drowned in the
sea of thought, saying in himself, "Praise be to Him who
fashioned her from dirty water!" [FN#172] Then he girt himself and
made ready for wrestling, and said to her, "Cross the stream to
me;" but she replied, "It is not for me to come over to thee: if
thou wilt, pass thou over here to me." "I cannot do that," quoth
he, and quoth she, "O boy, I will come across to thee." So she
tucked up her skirts and, leaping, landed on the other side of
the stream by his side; whereupon he drew near to her and bent
him forwards and clapped palms. [FN#173] But he was confounded by
her beauty and loveliness; for he saw a shape which the Hand of
Power had tanned with the dye leaves of the Jann, which had been
fostered by the Hand of Beneficence and fanned by the Zephyrs of
fair fortune and whose birth a propitious ascendant had greeted. 
Then she called out to him, "O Moslem, come on and let us wrestle
ere the break of morning," and tucked up her sleeves from a
forearm like fresh curd, which illumined the whole place with its
whiteness; and Sharrkan was dazzled by it.  Then he bent forwards
and clapped his palms by way of challenge, she doing the like,
and caught hold of her, and the two grappled and gripped and
interlocked hands and arms.  Presently he shifted his hands to
her slender waist, when his finger tips sank into the soft folds
of her middle, breeding languishment, and he fell a trembling
like the Persian reed in the roaring gale.  So she lifted him up
and, throwing him to the ground, sat upon his breast with hips
and hinder cheeks like mounds of sand, for his soul had lost
mastery over his senses.  Then she asked him, "O Moslem! the
slaying of Nazarenes is lawful to you folk; what then hast thou
to say about being slain thyself?"; and he answered, "O my lady,
thy speech as regards slaying me is not other than unlawful; for
our prophet Mohammed (whom Allah bless and preserve!) prohibited
the slaying of women and children, old men and monks!" "As it was
thus revealed to your Prophet," she replied, "it behoveth us to
render the equivalent of his mercy; so rise.  I give thee thy
life, for generosity is never lost upon the generous." Then she
got off his breast and he rose and stood shaking the dust from
his head against the owners of the curved rib, even women; and
she said to him, "Be not ashamed; but verily one who entereth the
land of Roum in quest of booty, and cometh to assist Kings
against Kings, how happeneth it that he hath not strength enough
to defend himself from one made out of the curved rib?" "'Twas
not for lack of strength in me," he answered; "nor didst thou
throw me by thy force; it was thy loveliness overthrew me; so if
thou wilt grant me another bout, it will be of thy courtesy." She
laughed and said, "I grant thee thy request: but these handmaids
have long been pinioned and their arms and sides are weary, and
it were only right I should loose them, for haply this next
wrestling bout will be long." Then she went to the slave girls
and, unbinding them, said to them in the tongue of Greece, "Get
ye to some safe place, till I foil this Moslem's lust and longing
for you." So they went away, whilst Sharrkan kept gazing at them
and they kept turning to look at the two.  Then each approached
the adversary and he set his breast against hers, but when he
felt waist touch waist, his strength failed him; and she, waxing
ware of this, lifted him with her hands swiftlier than the
blinding leven-flash, and threw him to the ground.  He fell on
his back, [FN#174] and then she said to him, "Rise: I give thee
thy life a second time.  I spared thee in the first count because
of thy Prophet, for that he made unlawful the slaying of women;
and I do so on the second count because of thy weakliness and the
greenness of thine years and thy strangerhood; but I charge thee,
if there be in the Moslem army sent by Omar bin al-Nu'uman to
succour the King of Constantinople, a stronger than thou, send
him hither and tell him of me: for in wrestling there are shifts
and trips, catches and holds, such as the feint or falsing and
the snap or first grip, the hug, the feet-catch, the thigh
Lite, [FN#175] the jostle and the leg-lock." "By Allah, O my
lady," quoth Sharrkan (and indeed he was highly incensed against
her), "had I been Master al-Safdi, Master Mohammed Kimal or Ibn
al-Saddi, [FN#176] as they were in their prime, I had kept no note
of these shifts thou mentionest; for O my mistress, by Allah,
thou hast not grassed me by thy strength, but by the
blandishments of thy back parts; for we men of Mesopotamia so
love a full formed thigh that nor sense was left me nor
foresight.  But now, an thou wish, thou shalt try a third fall
with me while my wits are about me, and this last match is
allowed me by the laws of the game which sayeth the best of
three: moreover I have regained my presence of mind." When she
heard his words she said to him, "Hast thou not had a belly full
of this wrestling, O vanquished one?  However come on, an thou
wilt; but know that this must be the last round." Then she bent
forward and challenged him and Sharrkan did likewise, setting to
it in real earnest and being right cautious about the throw: so
the two strove awhile and the damsel found in him a strength such
as she had not observed before and said to him, "O Moslem, thou
art now on thy mettle." "Yes," he replied, "thou knowest that
there remaineth to me but this one round, after which each of us
will wend a different way." She laughed and he laughed
too; [FN#177] then she overreached at his thigh and caught firm
hold of it unawares, which made him greet the ground and fall
full on his back.  She laughed at him and said, "Art thou an
eater of bran?  Thou are like a Badawi's bonnet which falleth off
with every touch or else the Father of Winds [FN#178] that
droppeth before a puff of air.  Fie upon thee, O thou poor
thing!" adding, "Get thee back to the Moslem army and send us
other than thyself, for thou fairest of thews; and proclaim for
us, among the Arabs and Persians, the Turks and
Daylamites, [FN#179] whoso hath might in him, let him come to us."
Then she made a spring and landed on the other side of the stream
and said to Sharrkan, laughing, "Parting with thee is right
grievous to me, O my lord; but get thee to thy mates before dawn,
lest the Knights come upon thee and pick thee up on their lance
points.  Thou hast no strength to defend thee against a woman, so
how couldst thou hold thine own amongst men of might and
Knights?" Sharrkan was confounded and called to her (as she
turned from him making towards the convent), "O my lady, wilt
thou go away and leave the miserable stranger, the broken hearted
slave of love?" So she turned to him laughing and said, "What is
thy want?  I will grant thee thy prayer." "Have I set foot in thy
country and tasted the sweetness of thy courtesy," replied he,
"and shall I return without eating of thy victual and tasting thy
hospitality; I who have become one of thy servitors!" "None baulk
kindliness save the base," she rejoined, "honour us in Allah's
name, on my head and eyes be it!  Mount thy steed and ride along
the brink of the stream over against me, for now thou art my
guest." At this Sharrkan was glad and, hastening back to his
horse, mounted and walked him abreast of her, and she kept faring
on till they came to a drawbridge [FN#180] built of beams of the
white poplar, hung by pullies and steel chains and made fast with
hooks and padlocks.  When Sharrkan looked, he saw awaiting her
upon the bridge the same ten handmaids whom she had thrown in the
wrestling bouts; and, as she came up to them, she said to one in
the Greek tongue, "Arise and take the reins of his horse and
conduct him across into the convent." So she went up to Sharrkan
and led him over, much puzzled and perturbed with what he saw,
and saying to himself, "O would that the Wazir Dandan were here
with me that his eyes might look upon these fairest of favours."
Then he turned to the young lady and said to her, "O marvel of
loveliness, now I have two claims upon thee; first the claim of
good fellowship, and secondly for that thou hast carried me to
thy home and offered me thy hospitality.  I am now under thy
commandance and thy guidance; so do me one last favour by
accompanying me to the lands of Al-Islam; where thou shalt look
upon many a lion hearted warrior and thou shalt learn who I am."
When she heard this she was angered and said to him, "By the
truth of the Messiah, thou hast proved thyself with me a man of
keen wit; but now I see what mischief there is in thy heart, and
how thou canst permit thyself a speech which proveth thy
traitorous intent.  How should I do as thou sayest, when I wot
that if I came to that King of yours, Omar bin al- Nu'uman, I
should never get free from him?  For truly he hath not the like
of me or behind his city walls or within his palace halls, Lord
of Baghdad and of Khorasan though he be, who hath built for
himself twelve pavilions, in number as the months of the year,
and in each a concubine after the number of the days; and if I
come to him he would not prove shy of me, for your folk believe I
am lawful to have and to hold as is said in your writ, 'Or those
women whom your right hand shall possess as slaves.' [FN#181] So
how canst thou speak thus to me?  As for thy saying, 'Thou shalt
look upon the braves of the Moslems,' by the truth of the
Messiah, thou sayest that which is not true, for I saw your army
when it reached our land, these two days ago; and I did not see
that your ordinance was the ordinance of Kings, but I beheld only
a rabble of tribesmen gathered together.  And as to thy words,
'Thou shalt know who I am,' I did not do thee kindness because of
thy dignity but out of pride in myself; and the like of thee
should not talk thus to the like of me, even wert thou Sharrkan,
Omar bin al- Nu'uman's son, the prowess name in these days!"
"Knowest thou Sharrkan?" asked he; and she answered Yes! and I
know of his coming with an army numbering ten thousand horsemen;
also that he was sent by his sire with this force to gain
prevalence for the King of Constantinople." "O my lady," said
Sharrkan, "I adjure thee by thy religion, tell me the cause of
all this, that sooth may appear to me clear of untruth, and with
whom the fault lies." "Now by the virtue of thy faith," she
replied, "did I not fear lest the news of me be bruited abroad
that I am of the daughters of Roum, I would adventure myself and
sally forth single handed against the ten thousand horsemen and
slay their leader, the Wazir Dandan and vanquish their champion
Sharrkan. [FN#182] Nor would aught of shame accrue to me thereby,
for I have read books and studied the rules of good breeding in
the language of the Arabs.  But I have no need to vaunt my own
prowess to thee, more by token as thou hast proved in thy proper
person my skill and strength in wrestling; and thou hast learnt
my superiority over other women.  Nor, indeed, had Sharrkan
himself been here this night and it were said to him, 'Clear this
stream,' could he have done it; and I only long and lust that the
Messiah would throw him into my hands in this very convent, that
I might go forth to him in the habit of a man and drag him from
his saddle seat and make him my captive and lay him in bilboes."-
-And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

              When it was the Forty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Nazarene damsel said to Sharrkan (and he listening impatiently
enow), "Verily if Sharrkan fell into my hands, I would go forth
to him in the habit of a man and drag him from his saddle seat
and make him my captive and lay him in bilboes," pride and
passion and knightly jealousy took possession of him and he
desired to discover and declare himself and to lay on load; but
her loveliness restrained him and he began repeating,

"An faulty of one fault the Beauty prove, * Her charms a thousand
     advocates shall move."

So she went up and Sharrkan after her; and, when he saw the
maiden's back and hinder cheeks that clashed against each other,
like rollers in the rolling sea, he extemporised these couplets:-
-

"For her sins is a pleader that brow, * And all hearts its fair
     pleading must bow:
When I saw it I cried, "To night * The moon at its fullest doth
     show;
Tho' Balkis' own Ifrit [FN#183] try a bout, * Spite his force she
     would deal him a throw."

The two fared on till they reached a gate over which rose a
marble archway.  This she opened and ushered Sharrkan into a long
vestibule, vaulted with ten connected arches, from each of which
hung a crystal lamp glistening like a spark of fire.  The
handmaids met her at the further end bearing wax candles of
goodly perfume, and wearing on their heads golden fillets crusted
with all manner bezel gems, [FN#184] and went on before her
(Sharrkan still following), till they reached the inner convent. 
There the Moslem saw couches and sofas ranged all around, one
opposite the other and all over hung with curtains flowered in
gold.  The monastery floor was paved with every kind of vari
coloured marbles and mosaic work, and in the midst stood a basin
that held four and twenty jetting fountains of gold, whence the
water ran like molten silver; whilst at the upper end stood a
throne spread with silks fit only for Kings.  Then said the
damsel, "Ascend, O my lord, this throne." So he went up to it and
sat down and she withdrew to remain absent for some time. 
Sharrkan asked of her from one of the servants who answered him,
"She hath gone to her dormitory; but we will serve thee even as
she ordered." So they set before him viands of rare varieties,
and he ate his sufficiency, when they brought him a basin of gold
and an ewer of silver, and he washed his hands.  Then his
thoughts reverted to his army, knowing not what had befallen it
in his absence and calling to mind also how he had forgotten his
father's injunctions: so he was troubled about his case,
repenting of what he had done till the dawn broke and the day
appeared; when he lamented and sighed and became drowned in sea
of sadness and repeated,

"I am not lost to prudence, but indeed * Here I'm bewildered,
     what shall be my rede?
Would any aid me in mine ails of love, * By my own might and
     sleight would I be free'd:
But ah! my heart is lost and passion-shent: * To none save Allah
     can I trust my need!"

When he ended his verse behold, there came up to him a rare show
and a fair, more than twenty maidens like crescents encompassing
the young lady, who shone in their midst as the full moon among
the constellations guarding and girding her.  She was clad in
brocades befitting Kings; her breasts were like twin
pomegranates, a woven zone set with all kinds of jewels tightly
clasped her waist which expanded below into jutting hips; and her
hinder cheeks stood out as a mound of crystal [FN#185] supporting
a silvern shaft.  When Sharrkan looked at her his wits went nigh
to fly away from him with delight; and he forgot army and Wazir
as he gazed on her fair head decked and dight with a net work of
pearls set off by divers sorts of gems.  Handmaids on her right
and handmaids on her left bore her train, as she paced with
dainty graceful gait in all the pride of seemlihead.  He sprang
to his feet seeing such beauty and loveliness, and cried aloud,
"Beware and beware of that zone rarely fair!" and broke out into
these couplets,

"With heavy back parts, high breasts delicate, * And lissome form
     that sways with swimming gait
She deftly hides love longing in her breast; * But I may never
     hide its ban and bate
While hosts of followers her steps precede, [FN#186] * Like pearls
     now necklaced and now separate."

She gazed upon him for a long time and considered him till she
was assured of him, when she came up to him and said, "In very
sooth the place is honoured and illumined by thee, O Sharrkan! 
How sped thy night, O hero, after we went away and left thee?";
adding, "Verily lying is a vile thing and a shameful, especially
in great Kings! and thou art Crown Prince Sharrkan, son and heir
of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman; so henceforth make no secret of thy
rank and condition, nor let me hear aught from thee but the
truth; for leasing bequeatheth hate and despite.  And as thou art
pierced by the shaft of Fate, be resignation thine and abide
content to wait." When he heard her words he saw that artifice
availed him naught and he acknowledged the truth, saying, "I am
Sharrkan, bin Omar bin al-Nu'uman, whom fortune hath afflicted
and cast into this place; so whatso thou willest, do it in my
case!" She hung her head groundwards a long while, then turned to
him and said, "Be of good cheer and let thine eyes be cool and
clear; [FN#187] for thou art the guest of my hospitality, and
bread and salt hath made a tie between me and thee; wherefore
thou art in my ward and under my safeguard.  Have no fear for, by
the truth of the Messiah, if all on earth sought to do thee hurt
they should not come at thee, till life had left my body for thy
sake: indeed thou art now under the charge of the Messiah and of
me." Hereat she sat her down by his side and fell to playing with
him, till his alarm subsided and he knew that had she desired to
slay him, she would have done so during the past night. 
Presently she bespoke in the Grecian tongue one of her slave
girls, who went away and soon came back bringing a beaker and a
tray of food; but Sharrkan abstained from eating and said to
himself, "Haply she hath put somewhat in this meat." She knew
what was in his thought; so she turned to him and said, "By the
truth of the Messiah, the case is not on such wise, nor is there
aught in this meat of what thou suspectest!  Had my mind been set
on slaying thee, I had slain thee ere now." Then she walked up to
the tray and ate of every dish a mouthful; where upon Sharrkan
came forward and ate too.  She was pleased at this and both ate
till they were satisfied.  They washed their hands and after that
she rose and ordered a handmaid to bring perfumes and herbs of
sweet savour, wines of all colours and kinds and a wine-service
with vessels of gold, silver and crystal.  She filled a first
goblet and drank it off before offering it to him, even as she
had done with the food: then she crowned a second and handed it
to him.  He drank and she said to him, "O Moslem, see how thou
art here in all solace and delight of life!" And she ceased not
to drink and ply him with drink, till he took leave of his wits,-
-And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day, and ceased saying her
permitted say.

               When it was the Forty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the damsel
ceased not to drink and ply Sharrkan with drink till he took
leave of his wits, for the wine and the intoxication of love he
bore her.  Presently she said to the slave girl, "O
Marjanah [FN#188]!  bring us some instruments of music!" "To hear
is to obey," said the hand maid and going out, returned in the
twinkling of an eye with a Damascus lute, [FN#189] a Persian harp,
a Tartar pipe, and an Egyptian dulcimer.  The young lady took the
lute and, after tuning each several string, began in gentle
undersong to sing, softer than zephyr's wing and sweeter than
Tasmin [FN#190] spring, with heart safe and secure from everything
the couplets following,

"Allah assain those eyne!  What streams of blood they shed! * How
     many an arrowy glance those lids of thine have sped.
I love all lovers who to lovers show them cure; * 'Twere wrong to
     rue the love in wrong head born and bred:
Haply fall hapless eye for thee no sleeping kens! * Heaven help
     the hapless heart by force of thee misled!
Thou doomest me to death who art my king, and I * Ransom with
     life the deemster who would doom me dead."

Thereupon each and every of the maidens rose up and taking an
instrument, played and recited couplets in the Roumi tongue; then
their mistress sang also and seeing Sharrkan in ecstasies asked
him, "O Moslem, dost thou understand what I say?"; and he
answered, "Nay, my ecstasy cometh from the beauty of thy finger
sips." She laughed and continued, "If I sing to thee in Arabic
what wouldst thou do?" "I should no longer," quoth he, "be master
of my senses." Then she took an instrument and, changing the
measure, began singing these verses,

"The smack of parting's myrrh to me, * How, then, bear patience'
     aloe?
I'm girt by ills in trinity          * Severance, distance,
     cruelty!
My freedom stole that fairest she,   * And parting irks me
     bitterly."

When she ended her verse, she looked at Sharrkan and found him
lost to existence, and he lay for a while stretched at full
length and prone among the maidens. [FN#191] Then he revived and,
remembering the songs, again inclined to mirth and merriment; and
the twain returned to their wine and wassail, and continued their
playing and toying, their pastime and pleasure till day ceased
illuminating and night drooped her wing.  Then the damsel went
off to her dormitory and when Sharrkan asked after her they
answered, "She is gone to her sleeping chamber," whereto he
rejoined, "Under Allah's ward and His good guard!" As soon as it
was morning, a handmaid came to him and said to him, "My mistress
biddeth thee to her." So he rose and followed her and, as he drew
near her lodging, the damsels welcomed him with smitten tabrets
and songs of greeting, and led him through a great door of ivory
studded with pearls and jewels.  Thence they passed with him into
a tall and spacious hall, at the upper end of which was a wide
dais carpeted with all kinds of silks, and round it open lattices
commanding a view of trees and streams.  About the saloon were
figures carved in human form, and fashioned on such wise that the
air passed through them and set in motion musical instruments
within, so that the beholder would fancy they spoke. [FN#192] Here
sat the young lady, looking at the figures; but when she saw
Sharrkan, she sprang to her feet and, taking him by the hand,
made him sit down by her side, and asked him how he had passed
the night.  He blessed her and the two sat talking awhile till
she asked him, "Knowest thou aught touching lovers and slaves of
love?"; and he answered "Yes!  I wot somewhat in verse on that
matter." "Let me hear it," quoth she, so he began quoting,

"Pleasure and health, good cheer, good appetite * To Azzah,
     freest with our name and fame!
By Allah!  would I near her off she flies * At tangent, granting
     less the more I claim:
I dote on Azzah, but when clear I off * My rivals, clears me too
     that dearest dame;
Like wandering wight that chose for shade a cloud * Which, ere
     siesta done, thin air became."

When she heard this she said, "Verily Al-Kuthayyir [FN#193] was
conspicuous for sweet speech and chaste, and he was superlative
in his praise of Azzah when he sang" (and she began to recite),

"Did Azzah deal behest to Sun o' noon, * The judge had judged her
     beauty's bestest boon;
And girls who come to me and carp at her, * God make their rosy
     cheeks her sandal-shoon!

And indeed," quoth she, "'twas said that Azzah boasted exceeding
beauty and loveliness." Then she asked Sharrkan saying, "O
Prince, cost thou know aught of Jamil's [FN#194] verses to
Buthaynah?  if so repeat to us somewhat of them;" and he
answered, "Yes, I know them better than any;" whereupon he began
repeating these couplets,

"Jamil, in Holy war go fight!" to me they say: * What war save
     fight for fair ones would I e'er essay?
To me their every word and work are mere delight, * And martyrs
     crepe I all they slay in fight and fray:
An ask I, 'O Buthaynah!  what's this love, I pray, * Which eats
     my heart?' quoth she ' 'Twill stay for ever and aye!'
And when I cry, 'Of wits return some small display * For daily
     use,' quoth she, 'Far, far 'tis fled away!
Thou seekst my death; naught else thy will can satisfy * While I
     no goal espy save thee and thee alway.'"

"Thou hast spoken right well," said she, "O King's son, and Jamil
also spoke excellently well.  But what would Buthaynah have done
with him that he saith in his hemistich,

'Thou seekst my death; naught else thy will can satisfy?'"

"O my lady," quoth Sharrkan, "she willed to do him what thou
willest to do with me, and even that will not satisfy thee." She
laughed at his opportune reply and they ceased not carousing till
Day put out her light and Night came in darkness dight.  Then she
rose and went to her dormitory and slept, while Sharrkan slept in
his place till morning dawned.  As soon as he awoke, the hand
maids came to him with tabrets and other instruments of mirth and
merriment, as wont; and, kissing the ground between his hands,
said to him, "Bismillah!  in Allah's name be so kind as to
come [FN#195]: our mistress biddeth thee to her presence!" So he
rose and accompanied the slave girls who surrounded him, playing
on tabrets and other instruments of music, till they passed from
that saloon into another and a yet more spacious hall, decorated
with pictured likenesses and figures of birds and beasts, passing
all description.  Sharrkan marvelled at the art and artifice of
the place and began reciting,

"He plucks fruits of her necklace in rivalry, * And her breast-
    pearls that bedded in gold mine lie.
Pure water on silvern bars is her brow, * And her cheeks show
     roses with rubies vie:
Meseems in her eyne that the violet's hue * Lies purpling set in
     the Ithmid's [FN#196] dye."

When the lady saw Sharrkan, she stood up to him in honour and,
taking his hand, seated him by her side and asked, "O son of King
Omar bin al-Nu'uman, hast thou any cunning in the game of chess?"
"Yes," he answered, "but do not thou with me as said the poet,

'I speak and longing love upties me and unties me; * Till with
     her honey dew of inner lip she plies me:
I brought the chess board and my liefest lover plays me * With
     white and black, [FN#197] but black cum white ne'er satisfies
     me:
'Twas as if King for Castle I were fain to place me * Till wilful
     loss of game atwixt two queens surprise me:
And if I seek to read intent in eyes that eye me * Oh man!  that
     glance askance with hint of wish defies me.'"

Then she brought the chessboard and played with him; but
Sharrkan, instead of looking at her moves, kept gazing at her
fair mouth, and putting knight in place of elephant and
elephant [FN#198] instead of knight.  She laughed and said to him,
"If thy play be after this fashion, thou knowest naught of the
game." "This is only our first," replied he, "judge not by this
bout." When she beat him he replaced the pieces in position and
played again with her; but she beat him a second time, a third, a
fourth and a fifth.  So she turned to him and said, "Thou art
beaten in everything;" and he replied, "O my lady, how should one
playing with the like of thee avoid being beaten?" Then she bade
bring food, and they ate and washed their hands; after which the
wine was set before them and they drank.  Presently, she took the
dulcimer, for her hand was cunning in smiting it, and she began
repeating to an accompaniment these couplets,

"Twixt the close tied and open wide no medium Fortune knoweth, *
     Now ebb and flow then flow and ebb this wise her likeness
     showeth.
Then drink her wine the syne she's thine and smiling thou dost
     find her * Anon she'll fall and fare away when all thy good
     forth goeth."

They ceased not to carouse till nightfall and this day was
pleasanter even than the first.  When darkness set in, the lady
betook her to her dormitory, leaving him alone with the hand
maids; so he threw himself on the ground and slept till dawn,
when the damsels came to him with tambourines and other
instruments according to custom.  Seeing them he roused him
hastily and sat up; and they carried him to their mistress, who
came to meet him and, taking him by the hand, seated him by her
side.  Then she asked him how he had passed his night, whereat he
prayed that her life be prolonged; and she took the lute and sang
to it these verses which she improvised,

"Ne'er incline thee to part * Which embitters the heart
E'en the sun when he sets   * Shall in pallor depart."

While they were solacing themselves after this fashion, behold,
there arose a great and sudden clamour, and a confused crowd of
knights and men rushed in, holding drawn swords that glittered
and gleamed in their hands, and cried aloud in the Grecian tongue
"Thou hast fallen into our hands, O Sharrkan, so make thee sure
of death!" When he heard this, he said to himself, "By Allah, she
hath entrapped me and held me in play, till her men should come. 
These are the Knights with whom she threatened me; but 'tis I who
have thrown myself into this strait." Then he turned towards the
young lady to reproach her, but saw that she had changed colour
and her face was pale; and she sprang to her feet and asked the
crowd, "Who are ye?" "O most gracious Princess and peerless onion
pearl," answered the leading Knight, "dost thou weet who is yon
man by thy side?" "Not I," she replied, "who may he be?" Quoth
the Patrician, "This is of towns the highwayman!  This is he who
rideth in the horseman's van!  This is Sharrkan, son of King Omar
bin al-Nu'uman!  This is he that forceth fortalice and
penetrateth every impregnable place!  The news of him reached
King Hardub, thy father, by report of the ancient dame Zat al-
Dawahi; and thy sire, our sovereign, hath made sure that thou
hast rendered good service to the army of the Greeks by taking
captive this ominous lion." When she heard this, she looked at
the Knight and asked him, "What be thy name?" and he answered, "I
am Masurah, son of thy slave Mausurah bin Kashardah, Knight of
Knights." "And how?" quoth she, "durst thou enter my presence
without leave?" Quoth he, "O my lady, when I came to the gate,
none forbade me, neither chamberlain nor porter, but all the door
keepers rose and forewent us as of wont; although, when others
come, they leave them standing at the gate while they ask
permission to admit them.  But this is not a time for long
talking, when the King is expecting our return with this Prince,
the scorpion sting [FN#199] of the Islamitic host, that he may
kill him and drive back his men whither they came, without the
bane of battling with them." "These words be ill words," rejoined
the Princess, "and Dame Zat al-Dawahi lied, avouching an idle
thing and a vain, whereof she weeteth not the truth; for by the
virtue of the Messiah, this man who is with me is not Sharrkan,
nor is he a captive, but a stranger who came to us seeking our
hospitality, and I made him my guest.  So even were we assured
that this be Sharrkan and were it proved to us that it is he
beyond a doubt, I say it would ill befit mine honour that I
should deliver into your hands one who hath entered under my
protection.  So make me not a traitor to my guest and a disgrace
among men; but return to the King, my father, and kiss the ground
before him, and inform him that the case is contrariwise to the
report of the Lady Zat al-Dawahi." "O Abrizah," replied Masurah,
the Knight, "I cannot return to the King's majesty without his
debtor and enemy." Quoth she (and indeed she had waxed very
wroth).  "Out on thee!  Return to him with my answer, and no
blame shall befal thee!" Quoth Masurah, "I will not return
without him." Thereupon her colour changed and she exclaimed,
"Exceed not in talk and vain words; for verily this man had not
come in to us, were he not assured that he could of himself and
single handed make head against an hundred riders; and if I said
to him, 'Thou art Sharrkan, son of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman,' he
would answer, 'Yes.' But 'tis not of your competence to let or
hinder him; for if you do so, he will not turn back from you till
he hath slain all that are in this place.  Behold, here he is by
my side, and I will bring him before you sword and targe in
hand." "Albeit I were safe from thy wrath," answered Masurah the
Knight, "I am not safe from that of thy father, and when I see
him, I shall sign to the Knights to take him captive, and we will
carry him to the King bound and in abject sort." When she heard
this, she said, "The matter shall not pass thus, for 'twould be
blazoning mere folly.  This man is but one and ye are an hundred
Knights: so if you would attack him come out against him, one
after one, that it may appear to the King which is the valiant
amongst you."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

                When it was the Fiftieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Princess
Abrizah said to the Knight, "This man is but one, and ye are an
hundred: so if ye would attack him, come out against him, one
after one, that it may appear to the King which is the valiant."
Quoth Masurah, the Knight, "By the truth of the Messiah, thou
sayest sooth, and none but I shall sally out against him first."
Quoth she, "Wait till I go to him and acquaint him with the case
and hear what answer he will make.  If he consent, 'tis well; but
if he refuse, ye shall on no wise come to him, for I and my hand
maids and whosoever is in the convent will be his ransom." So she
went to Sharrkan and told him the news, whereat he smiled and
knew that she had not informed any of the Emirs; but that tidings
of him had been bruited and blazed abroad, till the report
reached the King, against her wish and intent.  So he again began
reproaching himself and said, "How came I to adventure and play
with my life by coming to the country of the Greeks?" But hearing
the young lady's proposal he said to her, "Indeed their onset,
one after one, would be overburdensome to them.  Will they not
come out against me, ten by ten?" "That would be villainy," said
she; "Let one have at one." When he heard this, he sprang to his
feet and made for them with his sword and battle gear; and
Masurah, the Knight, also sprang up and bore down upon him. 
Sharrkan met him like a lion and delivered a shoulder cut [FN#200]
which clove him to the middle, and the blade came out gleaming
and glittering from his back and bowels.  When the lady beheld
that swashingblow, Sharrkan's might was magnified in her sight
and she knew that when she overthrew him in the wrestle it was
not by her strength but by her beauty and loveliness.  So she
turned to the Knights and said, "Take wreak for your chief!"
Thereupon out came the slain man's brother, a fierce and furious
Knight, and rushed upon Sharrkan, who delayed not, but smote him
also with the shoulder cut and the sword came out glittering from
his vitals.  Then cried the Princess, "O ye servants of the
Messiah, avenge your comrade!" So they ceased not charging down
upon him, one after one; and Sharrkan also ceased not playing
upon them with the blade, till he had slain fifty Knights, the
lady looking on the while.  And Allah cast a panic into the
hearts of the survivors, so that they held back and dared not
meet him in the duello, but fell upon him in a body; and he laid
on load with heart firmer than a rock, and smote them and trod
them down like straw under the threshing sled, [FN#201] till he
had driven sense and soul out of them.  Then the Princess called
aloud to her damsels, saying, "Who is left in the convent?"; and
they replied, "None but the gate keepers;" whereupon she went up
to Sharrkan and took him to her bosom, he doing the same, and
they returned to the palace, after he had made an end of the
melee.  Now there remained a few of the Knights hiding from him
in the cells of the monastery, and when the Princess saw this she
rose from Sharrkan's side and left him for a while, but presently
came back clad in closely meshed coat of ring mail and holding in
her hand a fine Indian scymitar.  And she said, "Now by the truth
of the Messiah, I will not be a niggard of myself for my guest;
nor will I abandon him though for this I abide a reproach and a
by word in the land of the Greeks." Then she took reckoning of
the dead and found that he had slain fourscore of the Knights,
and other twenty had taken to flight. [FN#202] When she saw what
work he had made with them she said to him, "Allah bless thee, O
Sharrkan!  The Cavaliers may well glory in the like of thee."
Then he rose and wiping his blade clean of the blood of the slain
began reciting these couplets,

"How oft in the mellay I've cleft the array, * And given their
     bravest to lions a prey:
Ask of me and of them when I proved me prow * O'er creation, on
     days of the foray and fray:
When I left in the onslaught their lions to lie * On the sands of
     the low lands [FN#203] in fieriest day."

When he ended his verse, the Princess came up to him with smiles
and kissed his hand; then she doffed her hauberk and he said to
her, "O lady mine, wherefore didst thou don that coat of mail and
bare thy brand?" "To guard thee against these caitiffs," [FN#204]
she replied.  Then she summoned the gate keepers and asked them,
"How came ye to admit the King's Knights into my dwelling without
leave of me?"; and they answered, "O Princess, it is not our
custom to ask leave of thee for the King's messengers, and
especially for the chief of his Knights." Quoth she, "I think ye
were minded only to disgrace me and murder my guest;" and bade
Sharrkan smite their necks.  He did so and she cried to the rest
of her servants, "Of a truth, they deserved even more than that!"
Then turning to Sharrkan, she said to him, "Now that there hath
become manifest to thee what was concealed, thou shalt be made
acquainted with my history.  Know, then, that I am the daughter
of King Hardub of Roum; my name is Abrizah and the ancient dame,
yclept Zat al-Dawahi, is my grandmother by the sword side.  She
it certainly is who told my father of thee, and as surely she
will compass a sleight to slay me, more by token as thou hast
slain my father's chivalry and it is noised abroad that I have
separated myself from the Nazarenes and have become no better
than I should be with the Moslems.  Wherefore it were wiser that
I leave this dwelling while Zat al-Dawahi is on my track; but I
require of thee the like kindness and courtesy I have shown thee,
for enmity will presently befal between me and my father on thine
account.  So do not thou neglect to do aught that I shall say to
thee, remembering all this betided me not save by reason of
thee." Hearing her words, Sharrkan joyed greatly; his breast
broadened and his wits flew from him for delight, and he said,
"By Allah, none shall come at thee, while life is in my bosom! 
But hast thou patience to bear parting from thy parents and thy
people?" "Even so," she answered; and Sharrkan swore to her and
the two plighted their troth.  Then said she, "Now is my heart at
ease; but there remaineth one other condition for thee." "What is
it?" asked he and she answered, "It is that thou return with thy
host to thine own country." Quoth he, "O lady mine, my father,
King Omar bin al- Nu'uman, sent me to wage war upon thy sire, on
account of the treasure he plundered from the King of
Constantinople, and amongst the rest three great jewels, noted
givers of good fortune." Quoth she, "Cheer thy heart and clear
thine eyes: I will tell thee the whole of the tale and the cause
of our feud with the King of Constantinople.  Know that we have a
yearly festival, highs the Convent Feast, whereat Kings from all
quarters and the noblest women are wont to congregate; thither
also come merchants and traders with their wives and families,
and the visitors abide there seven days.  I was wont to be one of
them; but, when there befel enmity between us, my father forbade
me to be present at the festival for the space of seven years. 
One year, it chanced that amongst the daughters of the great who
resorted to the patron, as was their custom, came a daughter of
the King of Constantinople, a beautiful girl called Sophia.  They
tarried at the monastery six days and on the seventh the folk
went their ways; [FN#205] but Sophia said, 'I will not return to
Constantinople save by water.' So they equipped for her a ship in
which she embarked with her suite; and making sail they put out
to sea; but as they were voyaging behold, a contrary wind caught
them and drove the vessel from her course till, as Fate and
Fortune would have it, she fell in with a Nazarene craft from the
Camphor Island [FN#206] carrying a crew of five hundred armed
Franks, who had been cruising about a long time.  When they
sighted the sails of the ship, wherein Sophia and her women were,
they gave chase in all haste and in less than an hour they came
up with her, then they laid the grappling irons aboard her and
captured her.  Then taking her in tow they made all sail for
their own island and were but a little distant from it when the
wind veered round and, splitting their sails, drove them on to a
shoal which lies off our coast.  Thereupon we sallied forth and,
looking on them as spoil driven to us by Fate, [FN#207] boarded
and took them; and, slaying the men, made prize of the wreck,
wherein we found the treasures and rarities in question and forty
maidens, amongst whom was the King's daughter, Sophia.  After the
capture we carried the Princess and her women to my father, not
knowing her to be a daughter of King Afridun of Constantinople;
and he chose out for himself ten including her; and divided the
rest among his dependents.  Presently he set apart five damsels,
amongst whom was the King s daughter, and sent them to thy
father, King Omar bin al-Nu'uman, together with other gifts, such
as broadcloth [FN#208] and woollen stuffs and Grecian silks.  Thy
father accepted them and chose out from amongst the five girls
Sophia, daughter of King Afridun; nor did we hear more of her
till the beginning of this year, when her father wrote to my
father in words unfitting for me to repeat, rebuking him with
menaces and saying to him: Two years ago, you plundered a ship of
ours which had been seized by a band of Frankish pirates in which
was my daughter, Sophia, attended by her maidens numbering some
threescore.  Yet ye informed me not thereof by messenger or
otherwise; nor could I make the matter public, lest reproach
befal me amongst the Kings, by reason of my daughter's honour. 
So I concealed my case till this year, when I wrote to certain
Frankish corsairs and sought news of my daughter from the Kings
of the Isles.  They replied, 'By Allah we carried her not forth
of thy realm; but we have heard that King Hardub rescued her from
certain pirates.  And they told me the whole tale.' Then he added
in the writing which he writ to my father: 'Except you wish to be
at feud with me and design to disgrace me and dishonour my
daughter, you will, the instant my letter reacheth you, send my
daughter back to me.  But if you slight my letter and disobey my
commandment, I will assuredly make you full return for your foul
dealing and the baseness of your practices.' [FN#209] When my
father read this letter and understood the contents, [FN#210] it
vexed him and he regretted not having known that Sophia, King
Afridun's daughter, was among the captured damsels, that he might
have sent her back to her sire; and he was perplexed about the
case because, after so long a time, he could not send to King
Omar bin al-Nu'uman and demand her back from him, especially as
he had lately heard that Heaven had granted him boon of babe by
this Sophia.  So when we pondered that truth, we knew that this
letter was none other than a grievous calamity; and my father
found nothing for it but to write an answer to King Afridun,
making his excuses and swearing to him by strong oaths that he
knew not his daughter to be among the bevy of damsels in the ship
and setting forth how he had sent her to King Omar bin al
Nu'uman, who had gotten the blessing of issue by her.  When my
father's reply reached King Afridun he rose up and sat
down, [FN#211] and roared and foamed at the mouth crying:--'What!
shall he take captive my daughter and even her with slave girls
and pass her on from hand to hand sending her for a gift to
Kings, and they lie with her without marriage contract?  By the
Messiah and the true Faith,' said he, 'I will not desist till I
have taken my blood vengeance for this and have wiped out my
shame; and indeed I will do a deed which the chroniclers shall
chronicle after me!' So he bided his time till he devised a
device and laid notable toils and snares, when he sent an embassy
to thy father, King Omar, to tell him that which thou hast heard:
accordingly thy father equipped thee and an army with thee and
sent thee to King Afridun, whose object is to seize thee and
thine army to boot.  As for the three jewels whereof he told thy
father when asking his aid, there was not one soothfast word in
that matter, for they were with Sophia, his daughter; and my
father took them from her, when he got possession of her and of
her maidens, and gave them to me in free gift, and they are now
with me.  So go thou to thy host and turn them back ere they be
led deep into, and shut in by, the land of the bevy of damsels in
the ship and setting forth the Franks and the country of the
Greeks; for as soon as you have come far enough into their
interior, they will stop the roads upon you and there will be no
escape for you till the Day of retribution and retaliation.  I
know that thy troops are still halting where thou leftest them,
because thou didst order a three days' rest; withal they have
missed thee all this time and they wot not what to do." When
Sharrkan heard her words, he was absent awhile in thought; then
he kissed Princess Abrizah's hand and said, "Praise be to Allah
who hath bestowed thee on me and appointed thee to be the cause
of my salvation and the salvation of whoso is with me!  But 'tis
grievous to me to part from thee and I know not what will become
of thee after my departure." "Go now to thine army," she replied,
"and turn them back, while ye are yet near your own country.  If
the envoys be still with them, lay hands on them and keep them,
that the case may be made manifest to you; and, after three days,
I will be with you all and we will enter Baghdad together." As he
turned to depart she said, "Forget not the compact which is
between me and thee," then she rose to bid [FN#212] him farewell
and embrace him and quench the fire of desire, so she took leave
of him and, throwing her arms round his neck, wept with exceeding
weeping, and repeated these verses,

"I bade adieu, my right hand wiped my tears away, * The while my
     left hand held her in a close embrace:
'Fearest thou naught,' quoth she, 'of shame?'  I answered 'Nay, *
     The lover's parting day is lover's worst disgrace.'"

Then Sharrkan left her and walked down from the convent.  They
brought his steed, so he mounted and rode down stream to the
drawbridge which he crossed and presently threaded the woodland
paths and passed into the open meadow.  As soon as he was clear
of the trees he was aware of horsemen which made him stand on the
alert, and he bared his brand and rode cautiously, but as they
drew near and exchanged curious looks he recognized them and
behold, it was the Wazir Dandan and two of his Emirs.  When they
saw him and knew him, they dismounted and saluting him, asked the
reason of his absence; whereupon he told them all that had passed
between him and Princess Abrizah from first to last.  The Wazir
returned thanks to Almighty Allah for his safety and
said, [FN#213] "Let us at once leave these lands; for the envoys
who came with us are gone to inform the King of our approach, and
haply he will hasten to fall on us and take us prisoners." So
Sharrkan cried to his men to saddle and mount, which they did
and, setting out at once, they stinted not faring till they
reached the sole of the valley wherein the host lay.  The
Ambassadors meanwhile had reported Sharrkan's approach to their
King, who forthright equipped a host to lay hold of him and those
with him.  But Sharrkan, escorted by the Wazir Dandan and the two
Emirs, had no sooner sighted the army, than he raised the cry
"March!  March!" They took horse on the instant and fared through
the first day and second and third day, nor did they cease faring
for five days; at the end of which time they alighted in a well
wooded valley, where they rested awhile.  Then they again set out
and stayed not riding for five and twenty days which placed them
on the frontiers of their own country.  Here, deeming themselves
safe, they halted to rest; and the country people came out to
them with guest gifts for the men and provender and forage for
the beasts.  They tarried there two days after which, as all
would be making for their homes, Sharrkan put the Wazir Dandan in
command, bidding him lead the host back to Baghdad.  But he
himself remained behind with an hundred riders, till the rest of
the army had made one day's march: then he called "To horse!" and
mounted with his hundred men.  They rode on two
parasangs' [FN#214] space till they arrived at a gorge between two
mountains and lo!  there arose before them a dark cloud of sand
and dust.  So they checked their steeds awhile till the dust
opened and lifted, discovering beneath it an hundred cavaliers,
lion faced and in mail coats cased.  As soon as they drew within
earshot of Sharrkan and his meiny they cried out to them, saying,
"By the virtue of John and Mary, we have won to our wish!  We
have been following you by forced marches, night and day, till we
forewent you to this place.  So dismount and lay down your arms
and yield yourselves, that we may grant you your lives." When
Sharrkan heard this, his eyes stood out from his head and his
cheeks flushed red and he said 'How is it, O.  Nazarene dogs, ye
dare enter our country and overmatch our land?  And doth not this
suffice you, but ye must adventure yourselves and address us in
such unseemly speech?  Do you think to escape out of our hands
and return to your country?" Then he shouted to his hundred
horsemen, "Up and at these hounds, for they even you in number!"
So saying, he bared his sabre and bore down on them, he and his,
but the Franks met them with hearts firmer than rocks, and wight
dashed against wight, and knight dashed upon knight, and hot
waxed the fight, and sore was the affright, and nor parley nor
cries of quarter helped their plight; and they stinted not to
charge and to smite, right hand meeting right, nor to hack and
hew with blades bright white, till day turned to night and gloom
oppressed the sight.  Then they drew apart and Sharrkan mustered
his men and found none wounded save four only, who showed hurts
but not death hurts.  Said he to them, "By Allah, my life long
have I waded in the clashing sea of fight and I have met many a
gallant sprite, but none so unfrightened of the sword that smites
and the shock of men that affrights like these valiant Knights!"
"Know, O King," said they, that there is among them a Frankish
cavalier who is their leader and, indeed, he is a man of valour
and fatal is his spear thrust: but, by Allah, he spares us great
and small; for whoso falls into his hands he lets him go and
forbears to slay him.  By Allah, had he willed he had killed us
all." Sharrkan was astounded when he heard what the Knight had
done and such high report of him, so he said, "When the morn
shall morrow, we will draw out and defy them, for we are an
hundred to their hundred; and we will seek aid against them from
the Lord of the Heavens." So they rested that night in such
intent; whilst the Franks gathered round their Captain and said,
"Verily this day we did not win our will of these;" and he
replied, "At early dawn when the morrow shall morn, we will draw
out and challenge them, one after one." They also rested in that
mind, and both camps kept guard until Almighty Allah sent the
light of day dawn.  Thereupon King Sharrkan and his hundred
riders took horse and rode forth to the plain, where they found
the Franks ranged in line of battle; and Sharrkan said to his
followers, "Our foes have determined like ourselves to do their
devoir; so up and at them and lay on load." Then came forth an
Herald of the Franks and cried out, saying, "Let there be no
general engagement betwixt us this day, save by the duello, a
champion of yours against a champion of ours." Whereupon one of
Sharrkan's riders dashed out from the ranks and crave between the
two lines crying, "Ho!  who is for smiting?  Let no dastard
engage me this day nor niderling!" Hardly had he made an end of
his vaunt, when there sallied forth to him a Frankish cavalier,
armed cap-a-pie and clad in a surcoat of gold stuff, riding on a
grey white steed, [FN#215] and he had no hair on his cheeks.  He
urged his charger on to the midst of the battle plain and the two
fell to derring do of cut and thrust, but it was not long before
the Frank foined the Moslem with the lance point; and, toppling
him from his steed, took him prisoner and led him off
crestfallen.  His folk rejoiced in their comrade and, forbidding
him to go out again to the field, sent forth another, to whom
sallied out another Moslem, brother to the captive, and offered
him battle.  The two fell to, either against other, and fought
for a little while, till the Frank bore down upon the Moslem and,
falsing him with a feint, tumbled him by a thrust of the lance
heel from his destrier and took him prisoner.  After this fashion
the Moslems ceased not dashing forwards, one after one, and the
Franks to unhorse them and take them captive, till day departed
and the night with darkness upstarted.  Now they had captured of
the Moslems twenty cavaliers, and when Sharrken saw this, it was
grievous to him and he mustered his men and said to them, "What
is this thing that hath befallen us?  To- morrow, I myself will
go forth to the field and offer singular combat to their chief
and learn what is the cause of his entering our land and warn him
against doing battle with our band.  If he persist, we will
punish him with death, and if he prove peaceable we will make
peace with him." They righted on this wise till Allah Almighty
caused the morn to dawn, when mounted the twain and drew up for
battle fain; and Sharrkan was going forth to the plain, but
behold, more than one half of the Franks dismounted and remained
on foot before one of them who was mounted, till they reached the
midst of the battle plain.  Sharrken looked at that horseman and
lo!  he was their chief.  He was clad in a surcoat of blue satin
and a close ringed mail shirt; his face was as the moon when it
rises and no hair was upon his cheeks.  He hent in hand an Indian
scymitar and he rode a sable steed with a white blaze on brow,
like a dirham; and he smote the horse with heel till he stood
almost in the midst of the field when, signing to the Moslems, he
cried out in fluent Arab speech "Ho, Sharrkan!  Ho, son of Omar
bin al- Nu'uman!  Ho, thou who forcest fortalice and overthrowest
cities and countries!  up and out to battle bout, and blade
single handed wield with one who halves with thee the field! 
Thou art Prince of thy people and I am Prince of mine; and whoso
overcometh his adversary, him let the other's men obey and come
under his sway." Hardly had he ended his speech, when out came
Sharrkan with a heart full of fury, and urging his steed into the
midst of the field, closed like a raging lion with the Frank who
encountered him with wariness and steadfastness and met him with
the meeting of warriors.  Then they fell to foining and hewing,
and they stinted not of onset and offset, and give and take, as
they were two mountains clashing together or two seas together
dashing; nor did they cease fighting until day darkened and night
starkened.  Then they drew apart and each returned to his own
party; but as soon as Sharrkan foregathered with his comrades, he
said, "Never looked I on the like of this cavalier: he hath one
quality I have not yet seen in any and this it is that, when his
foemen uncovereth a place for the death blow, he reverseth his
weapon and smiteth with the lance-heel!  In very deed I know not
what will be the issue 'twixt him and me; but 'tis my wish that
we had in our host his like and the like of his men." Then he
went to his rest for the night and, when morning dawned, the
Frank came forth and rode down to the mid field, where Sharrkan
met him; and they fell to fighting and to wheeling, left and
right; and necks were stretched out to see the sight, nor did
they stint from strife and sword play and lunge of lance with
main and might, till the day turned to night and darkness
overwhelmed the light.  Then the twain drew asunder and returned
each to his own camp, where both related to their comrades what
had befallen them in the duello; and at last the Frank said to
his men, "Tomorrow shall decide the matter!" So they both passed
that night restfully till dawn; and, as soon as it was day, they
mounted and each bore down on other and ceased not to fight till
half the day was done.  Then the Frank bethought him of a ruse;
first urging his steed with heel and then checking him with the
rein, so that he stumbled and fell with his rider; thereupon
Sharrkan threw himself on the foe, and would have smitten him
with the sword fearing lest the strife be prolonged, when the
Frank cried out to him, "O Sharrkan, champions are not wont to do
thus!  This is the act of a man accustomed to be beaten by a
woman." [FN#216] When Sharrkan heard this, he raised his eyes to
the Frank's face and gazing steadfastly at him, recognized in him
Princess Abrizah with whom that pleasant adventure had befallen
him in the convent; whereupon he cast brand from hand and,
kissing the earth before her, asked her, "What moved thee to a
deed like this?"; and she answered, "I desired to prove thy
prowess afield and test thy doughtiness in tilting and jousting. 
These that are with me are my handmaids, and they are all clean
maids; yet they have vanquished thy horsemen in fair press and
stress of plain; and had not my steed stumbled with me, thou
shouldst have seen my might and prowess in combat." Sharrkan
smiled at her speech and said, "Praise be to Allah for safety and
for my reunion with thee, O Queen of the age!" Then she cried out
to her damsels to loose the twenty captives of Sharrkan's troop
and dismount.  They did as she bade and came and kissed the earth
before her and Sharrkan who said to them, "It is the like of you
that Kings keep in store for the need hour." Then he signed to
his comrades to salute the Princess; so all alighted and kissed
the earth before her, for they knew the story.  After this, the
whole two hundred took horse, and fared on night and day for six
days' space, till they drew near to Baghdad, when they halted and
Sharrkan bade Abrizah and her handmaids doff the Frankish garb
that was on them,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

               When it was the Fifty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sharrkan
bade Princess Abrizah and her damsels doff the garb that was on
them and don the garments of daughters of Greece; and thus did
they.  Then he despatched a company of his companions to Baghdad
to acquaint his father Omar bin al-Nu'uman, with his arrival and
report that he was accompanied by Princess Abrizah, daughter of
King Hardub, Lord of Graecia-land.  They halted forthright in the
place they had reached, and Sharrkan also halted and all righted
there; and when Almighty Allah made morning dawn, Sharrkan and
his company and Abrizah and her company took horse and fared on
towards the city; when lo!  on the way they met the Wazir Dandan,
who had come out amongst a thousand horse to honour Abrizah and
Sharrkan, by especial commandment of King Omar Son of Al-
Nu'uman.  When the two drew near, they turned towards them and
kissed ground before them; then they mounted again and escorted
them into the city and went up with them to the palace.  Sharrkan
walked in to his father, who rose and embraced him and questioned
him of his case.  So he told him all that Abrizah had told him,
and what had passed between them and said, "She hath parted from
her sire and departed from her reign and hath chosen to take part
with us and make her abode with us; and indeed," he said to his
father, "the King of Constantinople hath plotted to do us a
mischief, because of his daughter Sophia, for that the King of
Greece had made known to him her story and the cause of her being
given to thee; and he (the Grecian King) not knowing her to be
daughter of King Afridun, Lord of Constantinople; and, had he
known that, he would not have bestowed her upon thee, but he
would have restored her to her parent.  And of a verity," he
continued, "we were saved from these perils only by the Lady
Abrizah, and never saw we a more valiant than she." And he went
on to tell his father all that had passed from first to last of
the wrestling and the single fighting.  When King Omar heard the
story of Sharrkan, Abrizah was exalted in his eyes, and he longed
to see her and question her.  Thereupon Sharrkan went out to her
and said, "The King calleth for thee;" she replied, "I hear and I
obey;" and he took her and brought her in to his father, who was
seated on his throne and who, having dismissed his high officers,
was attended only by his eunuchs.  The Princess entered and
kissing the ground between his hands, saluted him in choice
terms.  He was amazed at her eloquent speech and thanked her for
her dealing with his son Sharrkan and bade her be seated.  So she
sat down and unveiled her face; [FN#217] and, when the King saw
her beauty, his reason fled his head and he made her draw near
and showed her favour, appointing her an especial palace for
herself and her damsels, and assigning them solde and allowances. 
Then began he to ask her of the three jewels aforesaid, and she
answered, "Here be they with me, O King of the age!" So saying,
she rose and going to her lodging, unpacked her baggage and from
it brought out a box and from the box a casket of gold.  She
opened the casket and taking out those three jewels, kissed them
and gave them to the King.  Then she went away bearing his heart
with her.  After her going the King sent for his son Sharrkan and
gave him one jewel of the three, and when he enquired of the
other two replied, "O my son!  I mean to give one to thy brother
Zau al-Makan, and the other to thy sister Nuzhat al- Zaman." But
when Sharrkan heard that he had a brother (for to that time he
knew only of his sister) he turned to his sire and said to him,
"O King, hast thou a son other than myself?" He answered, "Yes,
and he is now six years old;" adding that his name was Zau al-
Makan and that he and Nuzhat al-Zaman were twins, born at a
birth.  This news was grievous to Sharrkan, but he kept his
secret and said, "The bless- ing of Allah Most High be upon
them!", and he cast the jewel from his hand and shook the dust
off his clothes.  Quoth the King, "How do I see thee change thy
manner when hearing of this, considering that after me thou
becomes" heir of the kingdom.  Of a truth the troops have sworn
to thee and the Emirs and Grandees have taken the oath of
succession to thee; and this one of the three jewels is thine."
Sharrkan bowed his head to the ground and was ashamed to bandy
words with his parent so he accepted the jewel and went away,
knowing not what to do for exceeding wrath, and stayed not
walking till he had entered Abrizah's palace.  As he approached
she stood up to meet him and thanked him for what he had done and
prayed for blessings on him and his sire.  Then she sat down and
seated him by her side; but when he had taken his place she saw
rage in his face and questioned him, whereupon he told her that
Allah had blessed his father with two children by Sophia, a boy
and a girl, and that he had named the boy Zau al-Makan and the
girl Nuzhat al-Zaman; adding, "He hath kept the other two jewels
for them and hath given me one of thine, so I left it behind; I
knew naught of Zau al-Makan's birth till this day, and the twain
are now six years old.  So when I learnt this, wrath possessed
me; and I tell thee the reason of my rage and hide nothing from
thee.  But now I fear lest my father take thee to wife, for he
loveth thee and I saw in him signs of desire for thee: so what
wilt thou say, if he wish this?" Quoth she, "Know, O Sharrkan,
that thy father hath no dominion over me, nor can he have me
without my consent; and if he prevail over me by force, I will
take my own life.  As for the three jewels, it was not my intent
that he should give any of them to either of his children and I
had no thought but that he would lay them up in his treasury with
his things of price; but now I desire of thy favour that thou
make me a present of the jewel which he gave thee, if thou have
accepted it." "Hearkening and obedience," replied Sharrkan, and
gave it to her.  Then said she, "Fear nothing," and talked with
him awhile and continued, "I fear lest my father hear that I am
with you and sit not patiently under my loss, but do his
endeavours to find me; and to that end he may ally himself with
King Afridun, on account of his daughter Sophia, and both come on
thee with armies and so there befal great turmoil." When Sharrken
heard these words, he said to her, "O my lady, if it please thee
to sojourn with us, take no thought of them; though there gather
together against us all that be on land and on sea." " 'Tis
well," rejoined she; "if ye entreat me fair, I will tarry with
you, and if ye deal evilly by me, I will depart from you." Then
she bade her slave maidens bring food; so they set the tables,
and Sharrkan ate a little and went away to his own house,
disturbed and perturbed.  Such was his case; but regarding the
affairs of his father, Omar bin al-Nu'uman, after dismissing his
son Sharrkan he arose and, taking the other two jewels, betook
himself to the Lady Sophia, who stood up when she saw him and
remained standing till he was seated.  Presently, his two
children, Zau al-Makan and Nuzhat al-Zaman, came to him and he
kissed them and hung a jewel round each one's neck, at which they
rejoiced and kissed his hands.  Then went they to their mother,
who joyed in their joy and wished the King long life; so he asked
her, "Why hast thou not informed me all this time that thou art
the daughter of King Afridun, Lord of Constantinople, that I
might have honoured thee still more and enlarged thee in dignity
and raised thy rank?" "O King," answered Sophia, "and what could
I desire greater or higher than this my standing with thee,
overwhelmed as I am with thy favours and thy benefits?  And,
furthermore, Allah hath blessed me with two children by thee, a
son and a daughter." Her reply pleased the King and after leaving
her, he set apart for her and her children a wondrous fine
palace.  Moreover, he appointed for them eunuchs and attendants
and doctors of law and doctors of philosophy and astrologers and
physicians and surgeons to do them service; and in every way he
redoubled his favour and entreated them with the best of
treatment.  And presently he returned to the palace of his
dominion and to his Court where he distributed justice among the
lieges.  So far concerning him and Sophia and her children; but
in the matter of Abrizah the King was greatly occupied with love
of her and burnt with desire of her night and day; and every
night, he would go in to her and converse with her and pay his
court to her, but she gave him no answer, only saying, "O King of
the age!  I have no desire for men at this present." When he saw
her withdraw from him, his passion waxed hotter and his longing
and pining increased until, when weary of this, he summoned his
Wazir Dandan and, opening his very heart to him, told him of his
love for Princess Abrizah, daughter of Hardub, and informed him
how she refused to yield to his wishes and how desire for her was
doing him to die, for that he could get no grace of her.  The
Wazir, hearing these words, said to the King, "As soon as it is
dark night, take thou a piece of Bhang the measure of a miskal,
about an ounce, and go in to her and drink somewhat of wine with
her.  When the hour of ending the carousel shall draw near, fill
her a last cup and dropping therein the Bhang, give it to her to
drink, and she will not reach her sleeping chamber ere the drug
take effect on her.  Then do thou go in to her and take thy will
of her; and such is my advice." [FN#218] "Thy rede is aright,"
quoth the King, and seeking his treasury, he took thence a piece
of concentrated Bhang, if an elephant smelt it he would sleep
from year to year.  This he put in his bosom pocket and waited
till some little of the night went by, when he betook himself to
the palace of Princess Abrizah, who seeing him stood up to
receive him; but he bade her sit down.  So she sat down, and he
sat by her, and he began to talk with her of wine and wassail,
whereupon she furnished the carousing table [FN#219] and placed it
before him.  Then she set on the drinking vessels and lighted the
candles and ordered to bring dried fruits and sweet meats and all
that pertaineth to drinking.  So they fell to tippling and the
King ceased not to pledge her till drunkenness crept into her
head; and seeing this he took out the bit of Bhang from his
pocket and, holding it between his fingers, filled a cup with his
own hand and drank it off.  Then filling a second he said, "To
thy companionship!"; and dropped the drug into her cup, she
knowing naught of it.  She took it and drank it off; then she
rose and went to her sleeping chamber.  He waited for less than
an hour till he was assured that the dose had taken effect on her
and had robbed her of her senses, when he went in to her and
found her thrown on her back: and she had doffed her petticoat
trousers and the air raised the skirt of her shift and discovered
what was between her thighs.  When the King saw the state of
things and found a lighted candle at her head and another at her
feet, shining upon what her thighs enshrined he took leave of his
five senses for lust and Satan seduced him and he could not
master himself, but put off his trousers and fell upon her and
abated her maiden head.  Then he rose off her and went to one of
her women, by name Marjanah, and said, "Go in to thy lady and
speak with her." So she went in to her mistress and found her
lying on her back insensible, with the blood running down to the
calves of her legs, whereupon she took a kerchief and wiped away
the blood and lay by her that night.  As soon as Almighty Allah
brought the dawn, the handmaid Marjanah washed her mistress's
hands and feet and brought rose water and bathed her face and
mouth with it, where upon she sneezed and yawned and cast up from
her inside that bit of Bhang like a bolus. [FN#220] Then she
revived and washed her hands and mouth and said to Marjanah,
"Tell me what hath befallen me." So she told her what had passed
and how she had found her, lying on her back, with the blood
running down, wherefore she knew that King Omar bin al-Nu'uman
had lain with her and had undone her and taken his will of her. 
At this she grieved with exceeding grief and retired into
privacy, saying to her damsels, "Deny me to whoso would come in
to me and say to him that I am ill, till I see what Allah will do
with me." Presently the news of her sickness came to the King; so
he sent her sherbets and sugar electuaries.  Some months she thus
passed in solitude, during which time the King's flame cooled and
his desire for her was quenched, so that he abstained from her. 
Now she had conceived by him, and when the months of child
breeding had gone by, her pregnancy appeared and her belly
swelled, and the world was straitened upon her, so she said to
her handmaid Marjanah, "Know that it is not the folk who have
wronged me, but I who sinned against my own self [FN#221] in that
I left my father and mother and country.  Indeed, I abhor life,
for my spirit is broken and neither courage nor strength is left
me.  I used, when I mounted my steed, to have the mastery of him,
but now I am unable to ride.  If I be brought to bed among them I
shall be dishonoured before my hand women and every one in the
palace will know that he hath taken my maidenhead in the way of
shame; and if I return to my father, with what face shall I meet
him or with what face shall I have recourse to him?  How well
quoth the poet,

'Say, what shall solace one who hath nor home nor stable stead *
     Nor cup companion, nor a cup, nor place to house his head?'"

Marjanah answered her, "It is thine to command; I will obey;" and
Abrizah said, "I desire at once to leave this place secretly, so
that none shall know of me but thou; and return to my father and
my mother, for when flesh stinketh, there is naught for it but
its own folk and Allah shall do with me e'en as He will." "O
Princess," Marjanah replied, "what thou wouldest do is well."
Then she made matters ready and kept her secret and waited for
some days till the King went out to chase and hunt, and his son
Sharrkan betook himself to certain of the fortresses to sojourn
there awhile.  Then said she to Marjanah, "I wish to set out this
night, but how shall I do against my destiny?  For already I feel
the pangs of labour and child birth, and if I abide other four or
five days, I shall be brought to bed here, and I shall be unable
to travel to my country.  But this is what was written on my
forehead." Then she considered awhile, and said to Marjanah,
"Look us out a man who will go with us and serve us by the way,
for I have no strength to bear arms." "By Allah, O my lady,"
replied Marjanah, "I know none but a black slave called Al-
Ghazban, [FN#222] who is one of the slaves of King Omar bin al-
Nu'uman; he is a valiant wight, and he keepeth guard at our
palace gate.  The King appointed him to attend us, and indeed we
have overwhelmed him with our favours; so, lookye, I will go out
and speak with him of this matter, and promise him some monies
and tell him that, if he have a mind to tarry with us, I will
marry him to whom he will.  He told me before to day that he had
been a highwayman; so if he consent to us we shall win our wish
and reach to our own land." She rejoined, "Call him that I may
talk with him;" whereupon Marjanah fared forth and said to the
slave, 'O Ghazban, Allah prosper thee, so thou fall in with what
my lady saith to thee!" Then she took him by the hand and brought
him to the Princess, whose hands he kissed but as she beheld him,
her heart took fright at him.  "How ever," she said to herself,
"of a truth, Need giveth the law;" and she approached to speak
with him, yet her heart started away from him.  Presently she
said, "O Ghazban, say me, wilt thou help me against the perfidies
of Fortune and conceal my secret if I discover it to thee?" When
the slave saw her, his heart was taken by storm and he fell in
love with her forthright and could not but reply; "O my mistress,
whatsoever thou biddest me do, I will not depart therefrom."
Quoth she, "I would have thee take me at this hour and take this
my handmaid and saddle us two camels and two of the King's horses
and set on each horse a saddle bag of goods and somewhat of
provaunt, and go with us to our own country; where, if thou
desire to abide with us, I will marry thee to her thou shalt
choose of my handmaidens, or, if thou prefer return to thine own
land, we will marry thee and give thee whatso thou desires" after
thou hast taken of money what shall satisfy thee." When Al
Ghazban, heard this, he rejoiced with great joy and replied, "O
my lady, I will serve both of you with mine eyes and will go at
once and saddle the horses." Then he went away gladsome and
saying to himself, "I shall get my will of them and if they will
not yield to me, I will kill them both and take their riches."
But he kept this his intent to himself, and presently returned
with two camels and three head of horses, one of which he rode,
and Princess Abrizah made Marjanah mount the second she mounting
the third, albeit she was in labour pains and possessed not her
soul for anguish.  And the slave ceased not travelling with them
night and day through the passes of the mountains, till there
remained but musingly march between them and their own country;
when the travail pangs came upon Abrizah and she could no longer
resist; so she said to Al-Ghazban, "Set me down, for the pains of
labour are upon me;" and cried to Marjanah, "Do thou alight and
sit by me and deliver me." Then Marjanah dismounted from her
horse, and Al-Ghazban did in like sort, and they made fast the
bridles and helped the Princess to dismount, for she was aswoon
from excess of anguish.  When Al-Ghazban saw her on the ground,
Satan entered into him and he drew his falchion and brandishing
it in her face, said "O my lady, vouchsafe me thy favours."
Hearing these words she turned to him and said, "It remaineth for
me only that I yield me to negro slaves, after having refused
Kings and Braves!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

              When it was the Fifty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Princess
Abrizah said to the black slave Al Ghazban, "It remaineth for me
only that I yield me to negro slaves, after having refused Kings
and Braves!" And she was wroth with him and cried, "Woe to thee! 
what words are these thou sayest?  Out on thee, and talk not thus
in my presence and know that I will never consent to what thou
sayest, though I drink the cup of death.  Wait till I have cast
my burden and am delivered of the after birth, and then, if thou
be able thereto, do with me as thou wilt; but, an thou leave not
lewd talk at this time assuredly I will slay myself with my own
hand and quit the world and be at peace from all this." And she
began reciting extempore, [FN#223]

"O spare me, thou Ghazban, indeed enow for me * Are heavy strokes
     of time, mischance and misery!
Whoredom my Lord forfends to all humanity; * Quoth He, 'Who
     breaks my bidding Hell for home shall see!'
And if thou leave not suing me to whoredom's way * Against th'
     Almighty's choicest gift, my chastity,
Upon my tribesmen I with might and main will call * And gather
     all, however far or near they be;
And with Yamani blade were I in pieces hewn, * Ne'er shall he
     sight my face who makes for villeiny,
The face of free born come of noble folk and brave; * What then
     can be to me the seed of whoreson slave?"

When Ghazban heard these lines he was wroth exceedingly; his eyes
reddened with blood and his face became a dusty grey [FN#224]; his
nostrils swelled, his lips protruded and the repulsiveness of his
aspect redoubled.  And he repeated these couplets,

"Ho thou, Abrizah, mercy! leave me not for I * Of thy love and
     Yamani [FN#225] glance the victim lie
My heart is cut to pieces by thy cruelty, * My body wasted and my
     patience done to die:
From glances ravishing all hearts with witchery * Reason far
     flies, the while desire to thee draws nigh;
Though at thy call should armies fill the face of earth * E'en
     now I'd win my wish and worlds in arms defy!"

When Abrizah heard these words, she wept with sore weeping and
said to him, "Woe to thee, O Ghazban!  How dareth the like of
thee to address me such demand, O base born and obscene bred? 
Dost thou deem all folk are alike?" When the vile slave heard
this from her, he waxt more enraged and his eyes grew redder: and
he came up to her and smiting her with the sword on her neck
wounded her to the death.  Then he drove her horse before him
with the treasure and made off with himself to the mountains. 
Such was the case with Al-Ghazban; but as regards Abrizah, she
gave birth to a son, like the moon, and Marjanah took the babe
and did him the necessary offices and laid him by his mother's
side; and lo and behold!  the child fastened to its mother's
breast and she dying. [FN#226]  When Marjanah saw this, she cried
out with a grievous cry and rent her raiment and cast dust on her
head and buffeted her cheeks till blood flowed, saying, "Alas, my
mistress!  Alas, the pity of it!  Thou art dead by the hand of a
worthless black slave, after all thy knightly prowess!" And she
ceased not weeping when suddenly a great cloud of dust arose and
walled the horizon; [FN#227] but, after awhile, it lifted and
discovered a numerous conquering host.  Now this was the army of
King Hardub, Princess Abrizah's father, and the cause of his
coming was that when he heard of his daughter and her handmaids
having fled to Baghdad, and that they were with King Omar bin al-
Nu'uman, he had come forth, leading those with him, to seek
tidings of her from travellers who might have seen her with the
King.  When he had gone a single day's march from his capital, he
espied three horse men afar off and made towards them, intending
to ask whence they came and seek news of his daughter.  Now these
three whom he saw at a distance were his daughter and Marjanah
and the slave Al- Ghazban; and he made for them to push inquiry. 
Seeing this the villain blackamoor feared for himself; so he
killed Abrizah and fled for his life.  When they came up, King
Hardub saw his daughter lying dead and Marjanah weeping over her,
and he threw himself from his steed and fell fainting to the
ground.  All the riders of his company, the Emirs and Waxirs,
took foot and forth right pitched their tents on the mountain and
set up for the King a great pavilion, domed and circular, without
which stood the grandees of the realm.  When Marjanah saw her
master, she at once recognized him and her tears redoubled; and,
when he came to himself, he questioned her and she told him all
that had passed and said, "Of a truth he that hath slain thy
daughter is a black slave belonging to King Omar bin al-Nu'uman,
and she informed him how Sharrkan's father had dealt with the
Princess.  When King Hardub heard this, the world grew black in
his sight and he wept with sore weeping.  Then he called for a
litter and, therein laying his dead daughter, returned to
Caesarea and carried her into the palace, where he went in to his
mother, Zat al-Dawahi, and said to that Lady of Calamities,
"Shall the Moslems deal thus with my girl?  Verily King Omar bin
al-Nu'uman despoiled her of her honour by force, and after this,
one of his black slaves slew her.  By the truth of the Messiah, I
will assuredly take blood revenge for my daughter and clear away
from mine honour the stain of shame; else will I kill myself with
mine own hand!" And he wept passing sore.  Quoth his mother,
"None other than Marjanah killed thy daughter, for she hated her
in secret;" and she continued to her son, "Fret not for taking
the blood wit of thy daughter, for, by the truth of the Messiah,
I will not turn back from King Omar bin al-Nu'uman till I have
slain him and his sons; and of a very truth I will do with him a
deed, passing the power of Sage and Knight, whereof the
chroniclers shall tell chronicles in all countries and in every
place: but needs must thou do my bidding in all I shall direct,
for whoso be firmly set on the object of his desire shall surely
compass his desire." "By the virtue of the Messiah," replied he,
"I will not cross thee in aught thou shalt say." Then quoth she,
"Bring me a number of hand maids, high bosomed virgins, and
summon the wise men of the age and let them teach them philosophy
and the rules of behaviour before Kings, and the art of
conversation and making verses; and let them talk with them of
all manner science and edifying knowledge.  And the sages must be
Moslems, that they may teach them the language and traditions of
the Arabs, together with the history of the Caliphs and the
ancient annals of the Kings of Al-Islam; and if we persevere in
this for four years' space, we shall gain our case.  So possess
thy soul in patience and wait; for one of the Arabs saith, 'If we
take man bote after years forty the time were short to ye.' When
we have taught the girls these things, we shall be able to work
our will with our foe, for he doteth on women and he hath three
hundred and sixty concubines, whereto are now added an hundred of
the flowers of thy handmaidens who were with thy daughter, she
that hath found mercy. [FN#228] As soon as I have made an end of
their education, as described to thee, I will take them and set
out with them in person." When King Hardub heard his mother's
words, he rejoiced and arose and kissed her head; and at once
despatched messengers and couriers to lands sundry and manifold
to fetch him Moslem sages.  They obeyed his commands and fared to
far countries and thence brought him the sages and the doctors he
sought.  When these came into presence, he honoured them with
notable honorurs and bestowed dresses on them and appointed to
them stipends and allowances and promised them much money whenas
they should have taught the damsels.  Then he committed the
handmaidens to their hands--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.

               When it was the Fifty-third Night.

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
sages and the doctors stood in presence of King Hardub, he
honoured them with notable honours and committed the hand maidens
to their hands, enjoining that these be instructed in all manner
of knowledge, philosophy and polite accomplishments; and they set
themselves to do his bidding.  Such was the case with King
Hardub; but as for King Omar bin al Nu'uman, when he returned
from coursing and hunting and entered his palace, he sought
Princess Abrizah but found her not, nor any one knew of her nor
could any give him news of her.  This was grievous to him and he
said, "How could the lady leave the palace unknown of any?  Had
my kingdom been at stake in this case, it were in perilous
condition there being none to govern it!  I will never again go
to sport and hunt till I have stationed at the gates those who
shall keep good guard over them!"  And he was sore vexed and his
breast was straitened for the loss of Princess Abrizah.  Hereupon
behold, his son Sharrkan returned from his journey; and the
father told him what had happened, and informed him how the lady
had fled, whilst he was chasing and hunting, whereat he grieved
with exceeding grief.  Then King Omar took to visiting his
children every day and making much of them and brought them
learned men and doctors to teach them, appointing for them
stipends.  When Sharrkan saw this, he raged with exceeding rage
and envied thereupon his brother and sister till the signs of
chagrin appeared in his face and he ceased not to languish by
reason of this matter: so one day his father said to him, "Why do
I see thee grown weak in body and yellow of face?" "O my father,"
replied Sharrkan, "every time I see thee fondle my brother and
sister and make much of them, jealousy seizeth on me, and I fear
lest it grow on me till I slay them and thou slay me in return. 
And this is the reason of my weakness of body and change of
complexion.  But now I crave of thy favour that thou give me one
of thy castles outlying the rest, that I may abide there the
remnant of my life, for as the sayer of bywords saith, 'Absence
from my friend is better and fitter for me'; and, 'Whatso eye
doth not perceive, that garreth not heart to grieve.'" And he
bowed his head towards the ground.  When King Omar bin al-Nu'uman
heard his words and knew the cause of his ailment and of his
being broken down, he soothed his heart and said to him, "O my
son, I grant thee this and I have not in my reign a greater than
the Castle of Damascus, and the government of it is thine from
this time." Thereupon he forthright summoned his secretaries of
state and bade them write Sharrkan's patent of investiture to the
viceroyalty of Damascus of Syria.  And when they had written it,
he equipped him and sent with him the Wazir Dandan, and invested
him with the rule and government and gave him instructions as to
policy and regulations; and took leave of him, and the grandees
and officers of state did likewise, and he set out with his host. 
When he arrived at Damascus, the townspeople beat the drums and
blew the trumpets and decorated the city and came out to meet him
in great state; whilst all the notables and grandees paced in
procession, and those who stood to the right of the throne walked
on his right flank, and the others to the left.  Thus far
concerning Sharrkan; but as regards his father, Omar bin al-
Nu'uman, soon after the departure of his son, the children's
tutors and governors presented themselves before him and said to
him, "O our lord, thy children have now learnt knowledge and they
are completely versed in the rules of manners and the etiquette
of ceremony." The King rejoiced thereat with exceeding joy and
conferred bountiful largesse upon the learned men, seeing Zau al-
Makan grown up and flourishing and skilled in horsemanship.  The
Prince had reached the age of fourteen and he occupied himself
with piety and prayers, loving the poor, the Olema and the Koran
students, so that all the people of Baghdad loved him, men and
women.  One day, the procession of the Mahmil [FN#229] of Irak
passed round Baghdad before its departure for the pilgrimage to
Meccah and visitation of the tomb of the Prophet (whom Allah
bless and preserve!).  When Zau al-Makan the Mahmil procession he
was seized with longing desire to become a pilgrim, [FN#230] so he
went in to his sire and said, "I come to ask thy leave to make
the pilgrimage." But his father forbade him saying, "Wait till
next year and I will go and thou too." When the Prince saw that
the matter was postponed, he betook himself to his sister Nuzhat
al-Zaman, whom he found standing at prayer.  As soon as she had
ended her devotions he said to her, "I am dying with desire of
pilgrimage to the Holy House of Allah at Meccah and to visit the
tomb of the Prophet, upon whom be peace!  I asked my father's
leave, but he forbade me that, so I mean to take privily somewhat
of money and set out on the pilgrimage without his knowledge."
"Allah upon thee," exclaimed she, "take me with thee and deprive
me not of visitation to the tomb of the Prophet, whom Allah bless
and keep!" And he answered, "As soon as it is dark night, do thou
come forth from this place, without telling any."
Accordingly,When it was the middle of the night she arose and
took somewhat of money and donned a man's habit; and she ceased
not walking to the palace gate, where she found Zau al-Makan with
camels ready for marching.  So he mounted and mounted her; and
the two fared on till they were in the midst of the Iraki [FN#231]
pilgrim-party, and they ceased not marching and Allah wrote
safety for them, till they entered Meccah the Holy and stood upon
Arafat and performed the pilgrimage rites.  Then they made a
visitation to the tomb of the Prophet (whom Allah bless and
assain!) and thought to return with the pilgrims to their native
land.  But Zau al-Makan said to his sister, "O my sister, it is
in my mind to visit the Holy House, [FN#232] Jerusalem, and
Abraham the Friend of Allah [FN#233] (on whom be peace!)." "I also
desire so to do," replied she.  So they agreed upon this and he
fared forth and took passage for himself and her and they made
ready and set out in the ship with a company of Jerusalem
palmers.  That very night the sister fell sick of an aguish
chill, and was grievously ill but presently recovered, after
which the brother also sickened.  She tended him during his
malady and they ceased not wayfaring till they arrived at
Jerusalem, but the fever increased on him and he grew weaker and
weaker.  They alighted at a Khan and there hired a lodging; but
Zau al- Makan's sickness ceased not to increase on him, till he
was wasted with leanness and became delirious.  At this, his
sister was greatly afflicted and exclaimed, "There is no Majesty
and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! 
This is the decree of Allah!" They sojourned in that place
awhile, his weakness ever increasing and she attending him and
buying necessaries for him and for herself, till all the money
she had was expended and she became so poor that she had not so
much as a dirham left.  Then she sent a servant of the Khan to
the bazar with some of her clothes, and he sold them and she
spent the price upon her brother; then sold she something more
and she ceased not selling all she had, piece by piece, till
nothing was left but an old rug.  Whereupon she wept and
exclaimed, "Verily is Allah the Orderer of the past and the
future!" Presently her brother said to her, "O my sister, I feel
recovery drawing near and my heart longeth for a little roast
meat." "By Allah!  O my brother," replied she, "I have no face to
beg; but tomorrow I will enter some rich man's house and serve
him and earn somewhat for our living." Then she bethought herself
awhile and said, "Of a truth 'tis hard for me to leave thee and
thou in this state, but I must despite myself!" He rejoined,
"Allah forbid!  Thou wilt be put to shame; but there is no
Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah!" And he wept and she
wept too.  Then she said, "O my brother, we are strangers who
have dwelt here a full year, but none hath yet knocked at our
door.  Shall we then die of hunger?  I know no resource but that
I go out and do service and earn somewhat to keep us alive, till
thou recover from thy sickness, when we will travel back to our
native land." She sat weeping awhile and he wept too, propped
upon his elbow.  Then Nuzhat al-Zaman arose and, veiling her head
with a bit of camlet, [FN#234] which had been of the cameleer's
clothes and which the owner had forgotten and left with them; she
kissed the head of her brother and embraced him and went forth
from him, weeping and knowing not whither she should wend.  And
she stinted not going and her brother Zau al-Makan awaiting her
return till the supper time; but she came not, and he watched for
her till the morning morrowed but still she returned not; and
this endured till two days went by.  He was greatly troubled
thereat and his heart fluttered for her, and hunger was sore upon
him.  At last he left the chamber and, calling the servant of the
caravanserai, said, "I wish thee to bear me to the bazar." So he
carried him to the market street and laid him down there; and the
people of Jerusalem gathered round him and were moved to tears
seeing his condition.  He signed to them begging for somewhat to
eat; so they brought him some money from certain of the merchants
who were in the bazar, and bought food and fed him therewith;
after which they carried him to a shop, where they spread him a
mat of palm leaves and set an ewer of water at his head.  When
night fell, all the folk went away, sore concerned for him and,
in the middle of the night, he called to mind his sister and his
sickness redoubled on him, so that he abstained from eating and
drinking and became insensible to the world around him.  Then the
bazar people arose and took for him from the merchants thirty
seven dirhams, and hiring a camel, said to the driver, "Carry
this sick man to Damascus and leave him in the hospital; haply he
may be cured and recover health." "On my head be it!" replied the
camel man; but he said to himself, "How shall I take this sick
man to Damascus, and he nigh upon death?" So he carried him away
to a place and hid with him till the night, when he threw him
down on the ash heap near the fire hole of a Hammam and went his
way.  When morning dawned the Stoker [FN#235] of the bath came to
his work and, finding Zau al-Makan cast on his back, exclaimed,
"Why did they not throw their dead body anywhere but here?" So
saying, he gave him a kick and he moved; whereupon quoth the
Fireman, "Some one of you who hath eaten a bit of Hashish and
hath thrown himself down in whatso place it be!" Then he looked
at his face and saw his hairless cheeks and his grace and
comeliness; so he took pity on him and knew that he was sick and
a stranger in the land.  And he cried, "There is no Majesty and
there is no Might save in Allah!  verily, I have sinned against
this youth, for indeed the Prophet (whom Allah bless and keep!)
enjoineth honour to the stranger, more especially when the
stranger is sick." Then he carried him home and went in with him
to his wife and bade her tend him.  So she spread him a sleeping
rug and set a cushion under his head, then warmed water for him
and washed therewith his hands and feet and face.  Meanwhile, the
Stoker went to the market and bought some rose water and sugar,
and sprinkled Zau al-Makan's face with the water and gave him to
drink of the sherbet.  Then he fetched a clean shirt and put it
on him.  With this, Zau al-Makan sniffed the zephyr of health and
recovery returned to him; and he sat up and leant against the
pillow.  Hereat the Fireman rejoiced and exclaimed, "Praise be to
Allah for the welfare of this youth!  O Allah, I beseech Thee by
Thy knowledge of hidden things, that Thou make the salvation of
this youth to be at my hands!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

              When it was the Fifty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Fireman
exclaimed, "O Allah, I beseech Thee of Thy knowledge of hidden
things, that Thou make this young man's life the work of my
hands!" And he ceased not to nurse him for three days, giving him
to drink of sherbet of sugar and willow flower water and rose
water; and doing him all manner of service and kindness, till
health began to return to his body and Zau al-Makan opened his
eyes.  Presently came in the Fireman and, seeing him sitting up
and showing signs of amendment, said to him, "What is now thy
state, O my son?" "Praise be to Allah," replied Zau al-Makan, "I
am well and like to recover, if such be the will of Allah
Almighty at this time." The Stoker praised the Lord of All for
this and, wending fast to the market, bought ten chickens, which
he carried to his wife and said, "Kill two of these for him every
day, one at dawn of day and the other at fall of day." So she
rose up and killed a fowl and brought it to him boiled, and fed
him with the flesh and made him drink its broth.  When he had
done eating, she fetched hot water and he washed his hands and
lay back upon the pillow, whereupon she covered him up with the
coverlet, and he slept till the time of the mid afternoon prayer. 
Then she arose and killed another fowl and boiled it; after which
she cut it up and, bringing it to Zau al-Makan, said, "Eat, O my
son!" While he was eating; behold, her husband entered and seeing
her feeding him, sat down at his head and said to him, "How is it
with thee now, O my son?" "Thanks be to Allah for recovery!" he
replied: "may the Almighty requite thee thy kindness to me." At
this the Fireman rejoiced and going out, bought sherbet of
violets and rose water and made him drink it.  Now the Stoker
used to work at the Hammam all day for a wage of five dirhams,
whereof he spent every day, for Zau al-Makan, one dirham upon
sugar and sherbet of rose water and willow flower water, [FN#236]
and another dirham for fowls; and he ceased not to entreat him
thus kindly during a whole month, till the traces of illness
ceased from him and he was once more sound and whole.  Thereupon
the Fireman and his wife rejoiced and asked him, "O my son, wilt
thou go with me to the bath?"; whereto he answered, "Yes!" So the
Stoker went to the bazar and fetched a donkey boy, and he mounted
Zau al-Makan on the ass and supported him in the saddle till they
came to the bath.  Then he made him sit down and seated the
donkey boy in the furnace-room and went forth to the market and
bought Iote leaves and lupin-flour, [FN#237] with which he
returned to the bath and said to Zau al-Makan, "O my master, in
Allah's name, walk in and I will wash thy body." So they entered
the inner room of the bath, and the Fireman took to rubbing Zau
al-Makan's legs and began to wash his body with the leaves and
meal, when there came to them a bathman, whom the bath keeper had
sent to Zau al-Makan; and he, seeing the Stoker washing and
rubbing him, said, "This is doing injury to the keeper's rights."
Replied the Fireman, "The master overwhelmeth us with his
favours!" Then the bathman proceeded to shave Zau al-Makan's
head, after which he and the Stoker washed themselves and
returned to the house, where he clad Zau al-Makan in a shirt of
fine stuff and a robe of his own; and gave him a handsome turband
and girdle and a light kerchief which he wound about his neck. 
Meanwhile the Fireman's wife had killed and cooked two chickens;
so, as soon as Zau al-Makan entered and seated himself on the
carpet, the husband arose and, dissolving sugar in willow flower
water, made him drink of it.  Then he brought the food tray and,
cutting up the chickens, fed him with the flesh and gave him the
broth to drink till he was satisfied; when he washed his hands
and praised Allah for recovery, and said to the Fireman, "Thou
art he whom the Almighty vouchsafed to me and made the cause of
my cure!" "Leave this talk," replied the other, "and tell us the
cause of thy coming to this city and whence thou art.  Thy face
showeth signs of gentle breeding." "Tell me first how thou camest
to fall in with me," said Zau al-Makan; "and after I will tell
thee my story." Rejoined the Fireman, "As for that, I found thee
lying on the rubbish heap by the door of the fire house, as I
went to my work near the morning, and knew not who had thrown
thee there.  So I carried thee home with me; and this is all my
tale." Quoth Zau al-Makan, "Glory to Him who quickeneth the
bones, though they be rotten!  Indeed, O my brother, thou hast
not done good save to one worthy of it, and thou shalt presently
gather its fruitage." And he added, "But where am I now?" "Thou
art in the city of Jerusalem," replied the Stoker; where upon Zau
al-Makan called to mind his strangerhood and remembered his
separation from his sister and wept.  Then he discovered his
secret to the Fireman and told him his story and began repeating,

"In love they bore me further than my force would go, * And for
     them made me suffer resurrection throe:
Oh, have compassion, cruel!  on this soul of mine * Which, since
     ye fared, is pitied by each envious foe;
Nor grudge the tender mercy of one passing glance * My case to
     lighten, easing this excess of woe:
Quoth I 'Heart, bear this loss in patience!' Patience cried *
     'Take heed! no patience in such plight I'm wont to show.' "

Then he redoubled his weeping, and the Fireman said to him, "Weep
not, but rather praise Allah for safety and recovery." Asked Zau
al-Makan, "How far is it hence to Damascus?" Answered the other,
"Six days' journey." Then quoth Zau al-Makan, "Wilt thou send me
thither?" "O my lord," quoth the Stoker, "how can I allow thee to
go alone, and thou a youth and a stranger to boot?  If thou would
journey to Damascus, I am one who will go with thee; and if my
wife will listen to and obey me and accompany me, I will take up
my abode there; for it is no light matter to part with thee."
Then said he to his wife, "Wilt thou travel with me to Damascus
of Syria or wilt thou abide here, whilst I lead this my lord
thither and return to thee?  For he is bent upon going to
Damascus of Syria and, by Allah, it is hard to me to part with
him, and I fear for him from highway men." Replied she, "I will
go with you both;" and he rejoined, "Praised be Allah for accord,
and we have said the last word!" Then he rose and selling all his
own goods and his wife's gear,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say,

               When it was the Fifty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Fire
man and his wife agreed with Zau al-Makan to travel with him
Damascus wards.  Then the Stoker sold his goods and his wife's
gear and bought a camel and hired an ass for Zau al-Makan; and
they set out, and ceased not wayfaring for six days till they
reached Damascus.  And they arrived there towards eventide; when
the Fireman went forth and, as was his wont, bought some meat and
drink.  They had dwelt but five days in Damascus, when his wife
sickened and, after a short illness, was translated to the mercy
of Almighty Allah.  Her death was a heavy matter to Zau al-Makan,
for he was grown used to her as she had tended him assiduously;
and the Fireman grieved for her with excessive grief.  Presently
the Prince turned to the Stoker and finding him mourning, said to
him, "Grieve not, for at this gate we must all go in." Replied
he, "Allah make weal thy lot, O my son!  Surely He will
compensate us with His favours and cause our mourning to cease. 
What sayst thou, O my son, about our walking abroad to view
Damascus and cheer thy spirits?" Replied Zau al-Makan, "Thy will
is mine." So the Fireman arose and placed his hand in that of Zau
al- Makan and the two walked on till they came to the stables of
the Viceroy of Damascus, where they found camels laden with
chests and carpets and brocaded stuffs, and horses ready saddled
and Bactrian dromedaries, while Mamelukes and negro slaves and
folk in a hubbub were running to and fro.  Quoth Zau al-Makan, "I
wonder to whom belong all these chattels and camels and stuffs!"
So he asked one of the eunuchs, "Whither this dispatching?'' and
he answered, "These are presents sent by the Emir of Damascus to
King Omar bin al-Nu'uman, with the tribute of Syria." Now when
Zau al-Makan heard his father's name his eyes brimmed over with
tears, and he began repeating,

"Oh ye gone from the gaze of these ridded eyne, * Ye whose sight
     in my spirit shall ever dwell!
Your charms are gone, but this heart of me * Hath no sweet, and
     no pleasures its sour dispel;
If Allah's grace make us meet again, * In long drawn love-tale my
     love I'll tell."

And when he had ended his verse, he wept and the Fireman said to
him, "O my son, we hardly believed that thy health had
returned; [FN#238] so take heart and do not weep, for I fear a
relapse for thee." And he ceased not comforting and cheering him,
whilst Zau al-Makan sighed and moaned over his strangerhood and
separation from his sister and his family; and tears streamed
from his eyes and he recited these couplets,

"Get thee provaunt in this world ere thou wend upon thy way, *
     And know how surely Death descends thy life lot to waylay:
All thy worldly goods are pride and the painfullest repine; * All
     thy worldly life is vexing, of thy soul in vain display:
Say is not worldly wone like a wanderer's place of rest, * Where
     at night he 'nakhs' [FN#239] his camels and moves off at dawn
     of day?"

And he continued to weep and wail over his separation; whilst the
Fireman also bewept the loss of his wife, yet ceased not to
comfort Zau al-Makan till morning dawned.  When the sun rose, he
said to him, "Meseemeth thou yearnest for thy native land?"
"Yes," replied Zau al-Makan, "and I can no longer tarry here; so
I will commend thee to Allah's care and set out with these folk
and journey with them, little by little, till I come to my mother
land." Said the Stoker, "And I with thee; for of a truth I cannot
bear to part with thee.  I have done thee kindly service and I
mean to complete it by tending thee on thy travel." At this, Zau
al-Makan rejoiced and said, "Allah abundantly requite thee for
me!" and was pleased with the idea of their travelling together. 
The Fireman at once went forth and bought another ass, selling
the camel; and laid in his provaunt and said to Zau al-Makan,
"This is for thee to ride by the way; and, when thou art weary of
riding, thou canst dismount and walk." Said Zau al-Makan, "May
Allah bless thee and aid me to requite thee!  for verily thou
hast dealt with me more lovingly than one with his brother." Then
he waited till it was dark night, when he laid the provisions and
baggage on that ass and set forth upon their journey.  This much
befel Zau al-Makan and the Fireman; but as regards what happened
to his sister Nuzhat al-Zaman, when she left her brother in the
Khan where they abode and, wrapped in the old camlet, went out to
seek service with some one, that she might earn wherewithal to
buy him the roast meat he longed for, she fared on, weeping and
knowing not whither to go, whilst her mind was occupied with
thoughts of her brother and of her family and her native land. 
So she implored Allah Almighty to do away with these calamities
from them and began versifying,

"Dark falls the night and Passion comes sore pains to gar me
     dree, * And pine upstirs those ceaseless pangs which work my
     tormentry,
And cease not separation flames my vitals to consume, * And
     drives me on destruction way this sorrow's ecstacy
And longing breeds me restlessness; desire for ever fires, * And
     tears to all proclaim what I would keep in secrecy
No cunning shift is known to me a meeting to secure, * That I may
     quit this sickly state, may cure my malady:
The love which blazeth in my heart is fed with fancy fuel, * The
     lover from its hell of fire must bear Hell's agony! [FN#240]
O thou who blamest me for all befel me, 'tis enough, * Patient I
     bear what ever wrote the Reed of Doom for me:
By Love I swear I'll never be consoled, no, never more; * I swear
     the oath of Love's own slaves who know no perjury:
O Night, to chroniclers of Love the news of me declare; * That
     sleep hath fed mine eyelids of thy knowledge witness bear!"

Then she walked on, weeping and turning right and left as she
went, when behold, there espied her an old Badawi [FN#241] who had
come into the town from the desert with wild Arabs other five. 
The old man took note of her and saw that she was lovely, but she
had nothing on her head save a piece of camlet, and, marvelling
at her beauty, he said to himself, "This charmer dazzleth men's
wits but she is in squalid condition, and whether she be of the
people of this city or she be a stranger, I needs must have her."
So he followed her, little by little, till he met her face to
face and stopped the way before her in a narrow lane, and called
out to her, asking her case, and said, "Tell me, O my little
daughter!  art thou a free woman or a slave?" When she heard
this, she said to him, "By thy life, do not add to my sorrows!"
Quoth he, "Allah hath blessed me with six daughters, of whom five
died and only one is left me, the youngest of all; and I came to
ask thee if thou be of the folk of this city or a stranger; that
I might take thee and carry thee to her, to bear her company so
as to divert her from pining for her sisters.  If thou have no
kith and kin, I will make thee as one of them and thou and she
shall be as my two children." Nuzhat al-Zaman bowed her head in
bashfulness when she heard what he said and communed with
herself, "Haply I may trust myself to this old man." Then she
said to him, "O nuncle, I am a maiden of the Arabs and a stranger
and I have a sick brother; but I will go with thee to thy
daughter on one condition, which is, that I may spend only the
day with her and at night may return to my brother.  If thou
strike this bargain I will fare with thee, for I am a stranger
and I was high in honour among my tribe, and I awoke one morning
to find myself vile and abject.  I came with my brother from the
land of Al-Hijaz and I fearless he know not where I am." When the
Badawi heard this, he said to himself, "By Allah, I have got my
desire!" Then he turned to her and replied, "There shall none be
dearer to me than thou; I wish thee only to bear my daughter
company by day and thou shalt go to thy brother at earliest
nightfall.  Or, if thou wilt, bring him over to dwell with us."
And the Badawi ceased not to console her heart and coax her, till
she trusted in him and agreed to serve him.  Then he walked on
before her and, when she followed him, he winked to his men to go
in advance and harness the dromedaries and load them with their
packs and place upon them water and provisions, ready for setting
out as soon as he should come up with the camels.  Now this
Badawi was a base born churl, a highway thief and a traitor to
the friend he held most fief, a rogue in grain, past master of
plots and chicane.  He had no daughter and no son and was only
passing through the town when, by the decree of the Decreer, he
fell in with this unhappy one.  And he ceased not to hold her in
converse on the highway till they came without the city of
Jerusalem and, when outside, he joined his companions and found
they had made ready the dromedaries.  So the Badawi mounted a
camel, having seated Nuzhat al-Zaman behind him and they rode on
all night.  Then she knew that the Badawi's proposal was a snare
and that he had tricked her; and she continued weeping and crying
out the whole night long, while they journeyed on making for the
mountains, in fear any should see them.  Now when it was near
dawn, they dismounted from their dromedaries and the Badawi came
up to Nuzhat al-Zaman and said to her, "O city strumpet, what is
this weeping?  By Allah, an thou hold not thy peace, I will beat
thee to death, O thou town filth!" When she heard this she
loathed life and longed for death; so she turned to him and said,
"O accursed old man, O gray beard of hell, how have I trusted
thee and thou hast played me false, and now thou wouldst torture
me?" When he heard her reply he cried out, "O lazy baggage, dost
thou dare to bandy words with me?" And he stood up to her and
beat her with a whip, saying, "An thou hold not thy peace, I will
kill thee!" So she was silent awhile, then she called to mind her
brother and the happy estate she had been in and she shed tears
secretly.  Next day, she turned to the Badawi and said to him,
"How couldst thou play me this trick and lure me into these bald
and stony mountains, and what is thy design with me?" When he
heard her words he hardened his heart and said to her, "O lazy
baggage of ill omen and insolent!  wilt thou bandy words with
me?" and he took the whip and came down with it on her back till
she felt faint.  Then she bowed down over his feet and
kissed [FN#242] them; and he left beating her and began reviling
her and said, "By the rights of my bonnet, [FN#243] if I see or
hear thee weeping, I will cut out thy tongue and stuff it up thy
coynte, O thou city filth!" So she was silent and made him no
reply, for the beating pained her; but sat down with her arms
round her knees and, bowing her head upon her collar, began to
look into her case and her abasement after her lot of high
honour; and the beating she had endured; and she called to mind
her brother and his sickness and forlorn condition, and how they
were both strangers in a far country, which crave her tears down
her cheeks and she wept silently and began repeating,

"Time hath for his wont to upraise and debase, * Nor is lasting
     condition for human race:
In this world each thing hath appointed turn; * Nor may man
     transgress his determined place:
How long these perils and woes?  Ah woe * For a life, all woeful
     in parlous case!
Allah bless not the days which have laid me low * I' the world,
     with disgrace after so much grace!
My wish is baffled, my hopes cast down, * And distance forbids me
     to greet his face:
O thou who passeth that dear one's door, * Say for me, these
     tears shall flow evermore!"

When she had finished her verses, the Badawi came up to her and,
taking compassion on her, bespoke her kindly and wiped away her
tears.  Then he gave her a barley scone and said, "I love not one
who answereth at times when I am in wrath: so henceforth give me
no more of these impertinent words and I will sell thee to a good
man like myself, who will do well with thee, even as I have
done." "Yes; whatso thou doest is right," answered she; and when
the night was longsome upon her and hunger burnt her, she ate
very little of that barley bread.  In the middle of the night the
Badawi gave orders for departure,--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

               When it was the Fifty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Badawi gave the barley scone to Nuzhat al-Zaman and promised he
would sell her to a good man like himself, she replied, "Whatso
thou doest is right!" and, about midnight when hunger burned
her, [FN#244] she ate a very little of that barley bread and the
Badawi ordered his party to set out; so they loaded their loads
and he mounted a camel setting Nuzhat al-Zaman behind him.  Then
they journeyed and ceased not journeying for three days, till
they entered the city of Damascus and alighted at the Sultan's
Khan, hard by the Viceroy's Gate.  Now she had lost her colour by
grief and the fatigue of such travelling, and she ceased not to
weep over her misfortunes.  So the Badawi came up to her and
said, "O thou city filth, by the right of my bonnet, if thou
leave not this weeping, I will sell thee to none but a Jew!" Then
he arose and took her by the hand and carried her to a chamber,
and walked off to the bazar, and he went round to, the merchants
who dealt in slave girls, and began to parley with them, saying,
"I have brought a slave girl whose brother fell ill, and I sent
him to my people about Jerusalem, that they might tend him till
he is cured.  As for her I want to sell her, but after the dog
her brother fell sick, the separation from him was grievous to
her, and since then she doth nothing but weep, and now I wish
that whoso is minded to buy her of me speak softly to her and
say, 'Thy brother is with me in Jerusalem ill'; and I will be
easy with him about her price." Then one of the merchants came up
to him and asked, "How old is she?" He answered "She is a virgin,
just come to marriageable age, and she is endowed with sense and
breeding and wit and beauty and loveliness.  But from the day I
sent her brother to Jerusalem, her heart hath been yearning for
him, so that her beauty is fallen away and her value lessened."
Now when the merchant heard this, he set forth with the Badawi
and said, "O Shaykh [FN#245] of the Arabs, I will go with thee and
buy of thee this girl whom thou praisest so highly for wit and
manners and beauty and loveliness; and I will pay thee her price
but it must be upon conditions which if thou accept, I will give
thee ready money, and if thou accept not I will return her to
thee." Quoth the Badawi, "An thou wilt, take her up to the Sultan
Sharrkan, son of Omar bin al-Nu'uman lord of Baghdad and of the
land of Khorasan, and condition me any conditions thou likest,
for when thou hast brought her before King Sharrkan, haply she
will please him, and he will pay thee her price and a good profit
for thyself to boot." Rejoined the merchant, "It happens that I
have just now something to ask from him, and it is this that he
write me an order upon the office, exempting me from custom dues
and also that he write me a letter of recommendation to his
father, King Omar bin al-Nu'uman.  So if he take the girl, I will
weigh [FN#246] thee out her price at once." "I agree with thee to
this condition," answered the Badawi.  So they returned together
to the place where Nuzhat al-Zaman was and the wild Arab stood at
the chamber door and called out, saying, "O Najiyah [FN#247]!"
which was the name wherewith he had named her.  When she heard
him, she wept and made no answer.  Then he turned to the merchant
and said to him, "There she sitteth; go to her and look at her
and speak to her kindly as I enjoined thee." So the trader went
up to her in courteous wise and saw that she was wondrous
beautiful and loveable, especially as she knew the Arabic tongue;
and he said to the Badawi, "If she be even as thou saddest, I
shall get of the Sultan what I will for her." Then he bespake
her, "Peace be on thee, my little maid!  How art thou?" She
turned to him and replied, "This also was registered in the Book
of Destiny." Then she looked at him and, seeing him to be a man
of respectable semblance with a handsome face, she said to
herself, "I believe this one cometh to buy me;" and she
continued, "If I hold aloof from him, I shall abide with my
tyrant and he will do me to death with beating.  In any case,
this person is handsome of face and maketh me hope for better
treatment from him than from my brute of a Badawi.  May be he
cometh only to hear me talk; so I will give him a fair answer."
All this while her eyes were fixed on the ground; then she raised
them to him and said in a sweet voice, "And upon thee be peace, O
my lord, and Allah's mercy and His benediction! [FN#248] This is
what is commanded of the Prophet, whom Allah bless and preserve! 
As for thine enquiry how I am, if thou wouldst know my case, it
is such as thou wouldst not wish but to thy foe." And she held
her peace.  When the merchant heard what she said, his fancy took
wings for delight in her and, turning to the Badawi, he asked
him, "What is her price, for indeed she is noble?" Thereupon the
Badawi waxed angry and answered, "Thou wilt turn me the girl's
head with this talk!  Why dost thou say that she is
noble, [FN#249] while she is of the scum of slave girls and of the
refuse of folk?  I will not sell her to thee!" When the merchant
heard this, he knew the man to be weak of wits and said to him,
"Calm thyself, for I will buy her of thee with these blemishes
thou mentionest." "And how much wilt thou give me for her?"
enquired the Badawi.  Replied the merchant, "Name thy price for
her: none should name the son save his sire." Rejoined the
Badawi, "None shall name it but thou thyself." Quoth the merchant
to himself, "This wildling is a rudesby and a maggotty head.  By
Allah, I cannot tell her price, for she hath won my heart with
her fair speech and good looks; and, if she can read and write,
it will be complete fair luck to her and to her purchaser.  But
this Badawi does not know her worth." Then he turned and said to
him, "O Shaykh of the Arabs, I will give thee in ready money,
clear of the tax and the Sultan's dues, two hundred gold pieces."
Now when the Badawi heard this, he flew into a violent rage and
cried at the merchant, saying, "Get up and go thy ways!  By
Allah, wert thou to offer me two hundred diners for the bit of
camlet she weareth, I would not sell it to thee.  And now I will
not sell her, but will keep her by me, to pasture the camels and
grind my grist." And he cried out to her, saying, "Come here,
thou stinkard!  I will not sell thee." Then he turned to the
merchant and said to him, "I used to think thee a man of
judgment; but, by the right of my bonnet, if thou begone not from
me, I will let thee hear what shall not please thee!" Quoth the
merchant to himself, "Of a truth this Badawi is mad and knoweth
not her value, and I will say no more to him about her price at
the present time; for by Allah, were he a man of sense, he would
not say, 'By the rights of my bonnet!' By the Almighty, she is
worth the kingdom of the Chosroes and I have not her price by me,
but if he ask even more, I will give him what he will, though it
be all my goods." Then he turned and said to him, "O Shaykh of
the Arabs, take patience and calm thyself and tell me what
clothes she hath with thee?" Cried the Badawi, "And what hath the
baggage to do with clothes?  By Allah, this camlet in which she
is wrapped is ample for her." "With thy leave," said the
merchant, "I will unveil her face and examine her even as folk
examine slave girls whom they think of buying." [FN#250]  Replied
the other, "Up and do what thou wilt and Allah keep thy youth! 
Examine her outside and inside and, if thou wilt, strip off her
clothes and look at her when she is naked." Quoth the trader,
"Allah forfend!  I will look at naught save her face." [FN#251] 
Then he went up to her and was put to shame by her beauty and
loveliness,--And Shahrazed perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

              When it was the Fifty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
merchant went up to Nuzhat al-Zaman and was put to shame by her
beauty and loveliness, so he sat by her side and asked her, "O my
mistress, what is thy name?" She answered, "Doss thou ask what is
my name this day or what it was before this day?" Thereupon the
merchant enquired, "Hast thou then two names: to day's and
yesterday's?" "Yes," replied she, "my name in the past was Nuzhat
al-Zaman, the Delight of the Age; but my name at this present is
Ghussat [FN#252] al-Zaman, the Despight of the Age." When the
merchant heard this his eyes brimmed over with tears and quoth he
to her, "Hast thou not a sick brother?" "Ay by Allah, O my lord,
I have," quoth she, "but fortune hath parted me and him and he
lieth sick in Jerusalem." The merchant's head was confounded at
the sweetness of her speech and he said to himself, "Verily, the
Badawi spake the truth of her." Then she called to mind her
brother and his sickness and his strangerhood and her separation
from him in his hour of weakness and her not knowing what had
befallen him; and she thought of all that had happened to her
with the Badawi and of her severance from her mother and father
and native land; and the tears coursed down her cheeks and fast
as they started they dropped; and she began reciting,

"Allah, where'er thou be, His aid impart * To thee, who distant
     dwellest in my heart!
Allah be near thee how so far thou fare; * Ward off all shifts of
     Time, all dangers thwart!
Mine eyes are desolate for thy vanisht sight, * And start my
     tears-ah me, how fast they start!
Would Heaven I kenned what quarter or what land * Homes thee, and
     in what house and tribe thou art
An fount of life thou drain in greenth of rose, * While drink I
     tear drops for my sole desert?
An thou 'joy slumber in those hours, when I * Peel 'twixt my side
     and couch coals' burning smart?
All things were easy save to part from thee, * For my sad heart
     this grief is hard to dree."

When the merchant heard her verses, he wept and put out his hand
to wipe away the tears from her cheeks; but she let down her veil
over her face, saying, "Heaven forbid, O my lord!'' [FN#253]  Then
the Badawi, who was sitting at a little distance watching them,
saw her cover her face from the merchant while about to wipe the
tears from her cheeks; and he concluded that she would have
hindered him from handling her: so he rose and running to her,
dealt her, with a camel's halter he had in his hand, such a blow
on the shoulders that she fell to the ground on her face.  Her
eyebrow struck a stone which cut it open, and the blood streamed
down her cheeks; whereupon she screamed a loud scream and felt
faint and wept bitterly.  The merchant was moved to tears for her
and said in himself, "There is no help for it but that I buy this
damsel, though at her weight in gold, and free her from this
tyrant." And he began to revile the Badawi whilst Nazhat al-
Zaman lay in sensible.  When she came to herself, she wiped away
the tears and blood from her face; and she bound up her head:
then, raising her glance to heaven, she besought her Lord with a
sorrowful heart and began repeating,

"And pity one who erst in honour throve, * And now is fallen into
     sore disgrace.
She weeps and bathes her cheeks with railing tears, * And asks
     'What cure can meet this fatal case?'"

When she had ended her verse, she turned to the merchant and said
in an undertone, "By the Almighty, do not leave me with a tyrant
who knoweth not Allah the Most High!  If I pass this night in his
place, I shall kill myself with my own hand: save me from him, so
Allah save thee from Gehenna-fire." Then quoth the merchant to
the Badawi, "O Shaykh of the Arabs, this slave is none of thine
affair; so do thou sell her to me for what thou wilt." "Take
her," quoth the Badawi, "and pay me down her price, or I will
carry her back to the camp and there set her to feed the camels
and gather their dung." [FN#254]  Said the merchant, "I will give
thee fifty thousand diners for her." "Allah will open!" [FN#255]
replied the Badawi.  "Seventy thousand," said the merchant. 
"Allah will open!" repeated the Badawi: "this is not the capital
spent upon her, for she hath eaten with me barley bread to the
value of ninety thousand gold pieces." The merchant rejoined,
"Thou and thine and all thy tribe in the length of your lives
have not eaten a thousand ducats' worth of barley; but I will say
thee one word, wherewith if thou be not satisfied, I will set the
Viceroy of Damascus on thee and he will take her from thee by
force." The Badawi continued, "Say on!" "An hundred thousand,"
quoth the merchant.  "I have sold her to thee at that price,"
answered the Badawi; "I shall be able to buy salt with her." The
merchant laughed and, going to his lodgings, brought the money
and put it into the hand of the Badawi, who took it and made off,
saying to himself, "Needs must I go to Jerusalem where, haply, I
shall happen on her brother, and I will bring him here and sell
him also." So he mounted and journeyed till he arrived at
Jerusalem, where he went to the Khan and asked for Zau al-Makan,
but could not find him.  Such was the case with him; but for what
regards the merchant and Nazhat al-Zaman, when he took her he
threw some of his clothes over her and carried her to his
lodgings,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

              When it was the Fifty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
trader saved Nuzhat al-Zaman from the Badawi and bore her to his
lodgings and robed her in the richest raiment, he went down with
her to the bazar, where he bought her what ornaments she chose
and put them in a satin bag, which he set before her, saying,
"All is for thee and I ask nothing of thee in return but that,
when I lead thee to the Sultan, Viceroy of Damascus, thou
acquaint him with the price I paid for thee, albeit it was little
compared with thy value: and, if seeing thee he buy thee of me,
thou tell him how I have dealt with thee and ask of him for me a
royal patent, and a written recommendation wherewith I can repair
to his father, King Omar bin al-Nu'uman, Lord of Baghdad, to the
intent that he may forbid the tax on my stuffs or any other goods
in which I traffic." When she heard his words, she wept and
sobbed, and the merchant said to her, "O my lady, I observe that,
every time I mention Baghdad, thine eyes are tearful: is there
any one there whom thou lovest?  If it be a trader or the like,
tell me; for I know all the merchants and so forth there and, if
thou wouldst send him a message, I will bear it for thee."
Replied she, "By Allah, I have no acquaintance among merchant
folk and the like!  I know none there but King Omar bin Nu'uman,
Lord of Baghdad." When the merchant heard her words, he laughed
and rejoiced with exceeding joy and said in himself, "By Allah, I
have won my wish!" Then he said to her, "Hast thou been shown to
him in time past?" She answered, "No, but I was brought up with
his daughter and he holdeth me dear and I have high honour with
him; so if thou wouldst have the King grant thee thy desire, give
me ink case and paper and I will write thee a letter; and when
thou reachest the city of Baghdad, do thou deliver it into the
hand of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman and say to him, 'Thy handmaid,
Nuzhat al-Zaman, would have thee to know that the chances and
changes of the nights and days have struck her as with a hammer,
and have smitten her so that she hath been sold from place to
place, and she sendeth thee her salams.' And, if he ask further
of her, say that I am now with the Viceroy at Damascus." The
merchant wondered at her eloquence, and his affection for her
increased and he said to her I cannot but think that men have
played upon thine understanding and sold thee for money.  Tell
me, dost thou know the Koran by heart?" "Yes," answered she; "and
I am also acquainted with philosophy and medicine and the
prolegomena of science and the commentaries of Galen, the
physician, on the canons of Hippocrates; and I have commented him
and I have read the Tazkirah and have commented the Burhan; and I
have studied the Simples of Ibn Baytar, and I have something to
say of the canon of Meccah, by Avicenna.  I can ree riddles and
can solve ambiguities, and discourse upon geometry and am skilled
in anatomy I have read the books of the Shafi'i [FN#256] school
and the Traditions of the Prophet and syntax; and I can argue
with the Olema and discourse of all manner learning.  Moreover I
am skilled in logic and rhetoric and arithmetic and the making of
talismans and almanacs, and I know thoroughly the Spiritual
Sciences [FN#257] and the times appointed for religious duties and
I understand all these branches of knowledge."  Then quoth she to
the merchant, "Bring me ink case and paper, that I write thee a
letter which shall aid thee on thy journey to Baghdad and enable
thee to do without passports." Now when the merchant heard this,
he cried out "Brava!  Brava! [FN#258] Then O happy he in whose
palace thou shalt!  Thereupon he brought her paper and ink case
and a pen of brass and bussed the earth before her face to do her
honour.  She took a sheet and handled the reed and wrote
therewith these verses,

"I see all power of sleep from eyes of me hath flown; * Say, did
     thy parting teach these eyne on wake to wone?
What makes thy memory light such burnings in my heart?  * Hath
     every lover strength such memories to own?
How sweet the big dropped cloud which rained on summer day; *
     'Tis gone and ere I taste its sweets afar 'tis flown:
I pray the wind with windy breath to bring some news * From thee,
     to lover wightwi' love so woe begone
Complains to thee a lover of all hope forlorn, * For parting
     pangs can break not only heart but stone."

And when she had ended writing the verses she continued, "These
words are from her who saith that melancholy destroyeth her and
that watching wasteth her; in the murk of whose night is found no
light and darkness and day are the same in her sight.  She
tosseth on the couch of separation and her eyes are blackened
with the pencils of sleeplessness; she watcheth the stars arise
and into the gloom she strains her eyes: verily, sadness and
leanness have consumed her strength and the setting forth of her
case would run to length.  No helper hath she but tears and she
reciteth these verses,

'No ring dove moans from home on branch in morning light, * But
     shakes my very frame with sorrow's killing might:
No lover sigheth for his love or gladdeth heart * To meet his
     mate, but breeds in me redoubled blight
I bear my plaint to one who has no ruth for me, * Ah me, how Love
     can part man's mortal frame and sprite!' "

Then her eyes welled over with tears, and she wrote also these
two couplets,

"Love smote my frame so sore on parting day, * That severance
     severed sleep and eyes for aye.
I waxt so lean that I am still a man, * But for my speaking, thou
     wouldst never say."

Then she shed tears and wrote at the foot of the sheet, "This
cometh from her who is far from her folk and her native land, the
sorrowful hearted woman Nuzhat al-Zaman." In fine, she folded the
sheet and gave it to the merchant, who took it and kissed it and
understood its contents and exclaimed, "Glory to Him who
fashioned thee!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

               When it was the Fifty-ninth Night,

She said, It reached me, O auspicious King, that Nuzhat al-Zaman
wrote the letter and gave it to the merchant; and he took it and
read it and understood the contents and exclaimed, "Glory to Him
who fashioned thee!"  Then he redoubled his kindness and made
himself pleasant to her all that day, and when night came he
sallied out to the bazar and bought some food, wherewith he fed
her; after which he carried her to the Hammam and said to the
bath woman, "As soon as thou hast made an end of washing her
head, dress her and send and let me know of it." And she replied
"Hearing is obeying." Meanwhile he fetched food and fruit and wax
candles and set them on the bench in the outer room of the bath;
and when the tire woman had done washing her, she dressed her and
led her out of the bath and seated her on the bench.  Then she
sent to tell the merchant, and Nuzhat al-Zaman went forth to the
outer room, where she found the tray spread with food and fruit. 
So she ate and the tire woman with her, and gave the rest to the
people and keeper of the bath.  Then she slept till the morning,
and the merchant lay the night in a place apart from her.  When
he aroused himself from sleep he came to her and waking her,
presented her with a shift of fine stuff and a head kerchief
worth a thousand diners, a suit of Turkish embroidery and walking
boots purfled with red gold and set with pearls and gems. 
Moreover, he hung in each of her ears a circlet of gold with a
fine pearl therein, worth a thousand diners, and threw round her
neck a collar of gold with bosses of garnet and a chain of amber
beads that hung down between her breasts over her navel.  Now to
this chain were attached ten balls and nine crescents, and each
crescent had in its midst a bezel of ruby, and each ball a bezel
of balass: the value of the chain was three thousand diners and
each of the balls was priced at twenty thousand dirhams, so that
the dress she wore was worth in all a great sum of money.  When
she had put these on, the merchant bade her adorn herself, and
she adorned herself to the utmost beauty; then she let fall her
fillet over her eyes and she fared forth with the merchant
preceding her.  But when folk saw her, all wondered at her beauty
and exclaimed, "Blessed be Allah, the most excellent Creator!  O
lucky the man in whose house the hall be!" And the trader ceased
not walking (and she behind him) till they entered the palace of
Sultan Sharrkan; when he sought an audience and, kissing the
earth between his hands, said, "O auspicious King, I have brought
thee a rare gift, unmatched in this time and richly gifted with
beauty and with good qualities." Quoth the King, "Let me see it."
So the merchant went out and brought her, she following him till
he made her stand before King Sharrkan.  When he beheld her,
blood yearned to blood, though she had been parted from him in
childhood and though he had never seen her, having only heard a
long time after her birth that he had a sister called Nuzhat al-
Zaman and a brother Zau al-Makan, he having been jealous of them,
because of the succession.  And such was the cause of his knowing
little about them.  Then, having placed her before the presence,
the merchant said, "O King of the age, besides being peerless in
her time and beauty and loveliness, she is also versed in all
learning, sacred and profane, including the art of government and
the abstract sciences." Quoth the King to the trader, "Take her
price, according as thou boughtest her, and go thy ways." "I hear
and I obey," replied the merchant; "but first write me a patent,
exempting me for ever from paying tithe on my merchandise." Said
the King, "I will do this, but first tell me what price thou
paidest for her." Said the merchant, "I bought her for an hundred
thousand diners, and her clothes cost me another hundred
thousand." When the Sultan heard these words, he declared, "I
will give thee a higher price than this for her;" and, calling
his treasurer, said to him, "Pay this merchant three hundred and
twenty thousand ducats; so will he have an hundred and twenty
thousand diners profit." Thereupon the Sultan summoned the four
Kazis and paid him the money in their presence and then he said,
"I call you to witness that I free this my slave girl and purpose
to marry her." So the Kazis wrote out the deed of emancipation
and the contract of marriage, when the Sultan scattered much gold
on the heads of those present; and the pages and the eunuchs
picked up this largesse.  Then, after paying him his monies,
Sharrkan bade them write for the merchant a perpetual patent,
exempting him from toll, tax or tithe upon his merchandise and
forbidding each and every in all his government to molest him,
and lastly bestowed on him a splendid dress of honour.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

                When it was the Sixtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King
Sharrkan bade them write for the merchant a mandate, after paying
him his monies; and they wrote a perpetual patent, exempting him
from the tithe upon his merchandise and forbidding any in his
government to molest him; and lastly bestowed upon him a splendid
dress of honour.  Then all about him retired, and none remained
save the Kazis and the merchant, whereupon said he to the judges,
"I wish you to hear such discourse from this damsel as may prove
her knowledge and accomplishments in all aimed for her by this
trader, that we ascertain the truth of his assertions." They
answered, "There is no evil in that!"; and he commanded the
curtain to be let down between him and those with him and the
maiden and those with her; and the women about the damsel behind
the curtains began to wish her joy and kiss her hands and feet,
when they learned that she was become the King's wife.  Then they
came round her and took off her dresses easing her of the weight
of her clothes and began to look upon her beauty and loveliness. 
Presently the wives of the Emirs and Wazirs heard that King
Sharrkan had bought a hand maiden unmatched for her beauty and
learning and philosophy and account keeping, and versed in all
branches of knowledge, that he had paid for her three hundred and
twenty thousand dinars, and that he had set her free and had
written a marriage contract with her and had summoned the four
Kazis to make trial of her, how she would answer all their
questions and hold disputetion with them.  So they asked leave of
their husbands and repaired to the palace wherein was Nuzhat al-
Zaman.  When they came in to her, they found the eunuchs standing
before her; and, as soon as she saw the wives of the Emirs and
Wazirs and Grandees of the realm coming to call upon her, she
arose to them on her feet and met them with courtesy, her
handmaidens standing behind her, and she received them saying,
"Ye be welcome!" The while she smiled in their faces so as to win
their hearts; and she promised them all manner of good and seated
them in their proper stations, as if she had been brought up with
them; so all wondered at her beauty and loveliness and said to
one another, "This damsel is none other than a Queen, the
daughter of a King." Then they sat down, magnifying her worth and
said to her, "O our lady, this our city is illumined by thee, and
our country and abode and birth place and reign are honoured by
thy presence.  The kingdom indeed is thy kingdom and the palace
is thy palace, and we all are thy handmaids; so, by Allah, do not
shut us out from thy favours and the sight of thy beauty." And
she thanked them for this.  All this while the curtains were let
down between Nuzhat al-Zaman and the women with her, on the one
side, and King Sharrkan and the four Kazis and the merchant
seated by him on the other.  Presently King Sharrkan called to
her and said, "O Queen, the glory of thine age, this merchant
hath described thee as being learned and accomplished; and he
claimeth that thou art skilled in all branches of knowledge, even
to astrology: so let us hear something of all this he hath
mentioned, and favour us with a short discourse on such
subjects." She replied, saying: "O King, to hear is to
obey. [FN#259] The first subjects whereof I will treat are the art
of government and the duties of Kings and what behoveth governors
of command meets according to religious law, and what is
incumbent on them in respect of satisfactory speech and manners. 
Know then, O King, that all men's works tend either to religious
or to laical life, for none attaineth to religion save through
this world, because it is the best road to futurity.  Now the
works of this world are not ordered save by the doings of its
people, and men's doings are divided into four divisions,
government, commerce, husbandry and craftsmanship.  Now
government requireth perfect administration with just and true
judgment; for government is the pivot of the edifice of the
world, which world is the road to futurity; since Allah Almighty
hath made the world for His servants as viaticum to the traveller
for the attainment of his goal; and it befitteth each man that he
receive of it such measure as shall bring him to Allah, and that
he follow not herein his own mind and his individual lust.  If
folk would take of worldly goods with justice and equity, all
cause of contention would be cut off; but they take thereof with
violence ant after their own desires, and their persistence
therein giveth rise to contentions; so they have need of the
Sultan, that he do justice between them and order their affairs;
and, if the King restrain not his folk from one another, the
strong will drive the weak to the wall.  Hence Ardeshir [FN#260]
saith, 'Religion and Kingship be twins'; religion is a hidden
treasure and the King is its keeper; and the Divine Ordinances
and men's intelligence point out that it behoveth the people to
adopt a Sultan who shall withhold oppressor from oppressed and do
the weak justice against the strong and restrain the violence of
the proud and the rebels against rule.  For know, O King, that
according to the measure of the Sultan's good morals, even so
will be the time; as saith the Apostle of Allah (on whom be peace
and salvation!), 'There be two classes who, if they be good, the
people will be good; and if they be bad, the people will be bad,
even the Olema and the Emirs.' And it is said by a certain sage,
'There be three kinds of Kings, the King of the Faith, the King
who protecteth things to which reverence is due, and the King of
his own lusts.' The King of the Faith obligeth his subjects to
follow their faith, and it behoveth he be the most
faithful, [FN#261] for it is by him that they take pattern in the
things of the Faith; and it becometh the folk to obey him in
whatso he commandeth according to Divine Ordinance; but he shall
hold the discontented in the same esteem as the contented,
because of submission to the decrees of Destiny.  As for the King
who protecteth things to be reverenced, he upholdeth the things
of the Faith and of the World and compelleth his folk to follow
the Divine Law and to preserve the rights of humanity; and it
fitteth him to unite Pen and Sword; for whoso declineth from what
Pen hath written his feet slip and the King shall rectify his
error with the sharp Sword and dispread his justice over all
mankind.  As for the King of his own lusts, he hath no religion
but the following his desire and, as he feareth not the wrath of
his Lord who set him on the throne, so his Kingdom inclineth to
deposition and the end of his pride is in the house of perdition. 
And sages say, 'The King hath need of many people, but the people
have need of but one King' wherefore it beseemeth that he be well
acquainted with their natures, that he reduce their discord to
concord, that with his justice be encompass them all and with his
bounties overwhelm them all.  And know, O King, that Ardeshir,
styled Jamr Shadid, or the Live Coal, third of the Kings of
Persia, conquered the whole world and divided it into four
divisions and, for this purpose, get for himself four seal rings,
one for each division.  The first seal was that of the sea and
the police of prohibition and on it was written, Alterna lives. 
The second was the seal of tribute and of the receipt of monies,
and on it was written, Building up.  The third was the seal of
the provisioning department and on it was written, Plenty.  The
fourth was the seal of the oppressed, and on it was written,
Justice.  And these usages remained valid in Persia until the
revelation of Al-Islam.  Chosroes also wrote his son, who was
with the army, 'Be not thou too open handed with thy troops, or
they will be too rich to need thee.'--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

               When it was the Sixty-first night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Chosroes
wrote his son, 'Be not thou too open handed with thy troops, or
they will be too rich to need thee; nor be thou niggardly with
them, or they will murmur against thee.  Give thy giving
deliberately and confer thy favours advisedly; open thy hand to
them in time of success and stint them not in time of distress.'
There is a legend that a desert Arab came once to the Caliph Al-
Mansur [FN#262] and said, 'Starve thy dog and he shall follow
thee.' When the Caliph heard his words, he was enraged with the
Arab, but Abu 'l-Abbas of Tus said to him, 'I fear that if some
other than thou should show him a scone, the dog would follow him
and leave thee alone.' Thereupon the Caliph Al-Mansur's wrath
subsided and he knew that the wild Arab had intended no offence
and ordered him a present.  And know, O King, that Abd al-Malik
bin Marwan wrote to his brother Abd al-Aziz, when he despatched
him to Egypt, as follows, 'Pay heed to thy Secretaries and thy
Chamberlains, for the Secretaries will acquaint thee with estate
fished matters and the Chamberlains with matters of official
ceremony, whilst thine expenditure will make thy troops known to
thee.' Omar bin Al-Khattab [FN#263] (whom Allah accept!) when
engaging a servant was in the habit of conditioning him with four
conditions; the first that he should not ride the baggage beasts,
the second that he should not wear fine clothes, the third that
he should not eat of the spoil and the fourth that he should not
put off praying till after the proper period.  It is said that
there is no wealth more profitable than understanding, and there
is no understanding like common sense and prudence, and there is
no prudence like piety; that there is no means of drawing near to
God like good morals, no measure like good breeding, no traffic
like good works and no profit like earning the Divine favour;
that there is no temperance like standing within the limits of
the law, no science like that of meditation, no worship like
obeying the Divine commends, no faith like modesty, no
calculation like self abasement and no honour like knowledge.  So
guard the head and what it containeth and the belly and what it
compriseth; and think of death and doom ere it ariseth.  Saith
Ali (whose face Allah honour!), 'Beware of the wickedness of
women and be on thy guard against them: consult them not in
aught; [FN#264] but grudge not complaisance to them, lest they
greed for intrigue.' And eke quoth he, 'Whoso leaveth the path of
moderation his wits become perplexed'; and there be rules for
this which we will mention, if it be Allah's will.  And Omar
(whom Allah accept!) saith, 'There are three kinds of women,
firstly the true believing, Heaven fearing, love full and fruit
full, who helpeth her mate against fate, not helping fate against
her mate; secondly, she who loveth her children but no more and,
lastly, she who is a shackle Allah setteth on the neck of whom He
will.' Men be also three: the wise when he exerciseth his own
judgement; the wiser who, when befalleth somewhat whereof he
knoweth not the issue, seeketh folk of good counsel and acteth by
their advice; and the unwise irresolute ignoring the right way
nor heeding those who would guide him straight.  Justice is
indispensable in all things; even slave girls have need of
justice; and men quote as an instance highway robbers who live by
violenting mankind, for did they not deal equitably among
themselves and observe justice in dividing their booty, their
order would fall to pieces. [FN#265] In short, for the rest, the
Prince of noble qualities is Beneficence cum Benevolence; and how
excellent is the saying of the poet,

By open hand and ruth the youth rose to his tribe's command; * Go
     and do likewise for the same were easy task to thee.'

And quoth another,

'In ruth and mildness surety lies and mercy wins respect, * And
     Truth is best asylum for the man of soothfast soul:
Whoso for wealth of gold would win and wear the world's good
     word, * On glory's course must ever be the first to gain the
     goal.'"

And Nazhat al-Zaman discoursed upon the policy of Kings till the
bystanders said, "Never have we seen one reason of rule and
government like this damsel!  Haply she will let us hear some
discourse upon subject other than this." When she heard their
words and understood them she said, "As for the chapter of good
breeding, it is wide of comprehension, being a compend of things
perfect.  Now it so happened that one day there came to the
Caliph Mu'awiyah [FN#266] one of his companions, who mentioned the
people of Irak and the goodness of their wit; and the Caliph's
wife Maysun, mother of Yezid, heard his words.  So, when he was
gone, she said to the Caliph, 'O Prince of the Faithful, I would
thou let some of the people of Irak come in and talk to thee,
that I may hear their discourse.' Therewith Mu'awiyah said to his
attendants, 'See who is at the door?' And they answered, 'The
Banu Tamim.' 'Let them come in,' said he.  So they came in and
with them Al-Ahnaf son of Kays. [FN#267]  Then quoth Mu'awiyah,
'Enter, O Abu Bahr,' and drew a curtain between himself and
Maysun, that she might hear what they said without being seen
herself; then he said to Al-Ahnaf, 'O Son of the Sea, draw near
and tell me what counsel thou hast for me.' Quoth Al-Ahnaf, 'Part
thy hair and trim thy moustachio and pare thy nails and pluck
thine armpits and shave thy pubes [FN#268] and ever use the
toothstick because therein be two and seventy virtues, and make
the Ghusl or complete ablution on Friday, as an expiation for all
between the Fridays.'--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

              When it was the Sixty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ahnaf bin
Kays replied to Al-Mu'awiyah's [FN#269] question, 'And ever use
the toothstick, because therein be two end seventy virtues and
make the complete Friday ablution as an expiation for all between
the two Fridays.' Quoth Mu'awiyah, 'What is thy counsel to
thyself?' 'To set my feet firmly on the ground, to move them
deliberately and watch over them with mine eyes!' 'How dost thou
order thyself when thou goest in to one not of the nobles of thy
tribe?' 'I lower mine eyes modestly and I salute first; I avoid
what concerneth me not and I spare my words!' 'And how when thou
goest in to thine equals?' 'I give ear to them when they speak
and I do not assail them when they err!'  'When thou goest in to
thy chiefs?' 'I salute without making any sign and await the
reply: if they bid me draw near, I draw near, and if they draw
off from me I withdraw!' 'How dost thou with thy wife?' Quoth
Ahnaf, 'Excuse me from answering this, O Commander of the
Faithful!'; but Mu'awiyah cried, 'I conjure thee inform me.' He
said, 'I entreat her kindly and show her familiarity and am large
in expenditure, for woman was created of a crooked rib.' [FN#270] 
'And how dost thou when thou hast a mind to lie with her?' 'I bid
her perfume herself and kiss her till she is moved to desire;
then, should it be as thou knowest, [FN#271] I throw her on her
back.  If the seed abide in her womb I say, 'O Allah make it
blessed and let it not be a wastrel, but fashion it into the best
of fashions!' [FN#272]  Then I rise from her to ablution and first
I pour water over my hands and then over my body and lastly, I
praise Allah for the joy He hath given me.' Said Mu'awiyah, 'Thou
hast answered right well and now tell me what be thy
requirements?' Said Ahnaf, 'I would have thee rule thy subjects
in the fear of Allah and do even handed justice between them.'
Thereupon Ahnaf rose to his feet and left the Caliph's presence,
and when he had gone Maysun said, 'Were there but this man in
Irak, he would suffice to it.' Then continued Nuzhat al-Zaman,
"And all this is a section of the chapter of good breeding, and
know O King, that Muaykib was intendant of the public treasury
during the Caliphate of Omar bin al-Khattab,"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

               When it was the Sixty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Nuzhat al-
Zaman continued, "Know, O King, that Mu'aykib was intendant of
the public treasury during the Caliphate of Omar bin al-Khattab;
and it so befel him that he saw Omar's son and gave him a dirham
out of the treasury.  Thereupon, quoth Mu'aykib, 'I returned to
my own house, and while I was sitting there behold, a messenger
came to me from Omar and I was afraid and went to him, and when I
came into his presence, in his hand was the dirham I had given
his son.  He said to me, 'Woe to thee Mu'aykib!  I have found
somewhat concerning thy soul.' I asked 'And what is that?'; and
he answered, 'It is that thou hast shown thyself a foe to the
followers of Mohammed (on whom be peace and salvation!) in the
matter of this dirham, and thou wilt have to account for it on
Resurrection Day.' [FN#273] And Omar also wrote a letter to Abu
Musa al-Ashari [FN#274] as follows, 'When these presents reach
thee, give the people what is theirs and remit to me the rest.'
And he did so.  Now when Othman succeeded to the Caliphate, he
wrote a like letter to Abu Musa, who did his bidding and sent him
the tribute accordingly, and with it came Ziyad. [FN#275]  And
when Ziyad laid the tribute before Othman, the Caliph's son came
in and took a dirham, whereupon Ziyad shed tears.  Othman asked
'Why weepest thou?'; and Ziyad answered, 'I once brought Omar bin
al-Khattab the like of this and his son took a dirham, where upon
Omar bade snatch it from his hand.  Now thy son hath taken of the
tribute, yet I have seen none say aught to him or snatch the
money from him.' Then Othman [FN#276] cried, 'And where wilt thou
find the like of Omar?' Again Zayd bin Aslam relates of his
father that he said, 'I went out one night with Omar till we
approached a blazing fire.  Quoth Omar, 'O Aslam, I think these
must be travellers who are suffering from the cold.  Come, let us
join them.' So we walked on till we came to them and behold!  we
found a woman who had lighted a fire under a cauldron and by her
side were two children, both a wailing.  Said Omar, 'Peace be
with you, O folk of light (for it was repugnant to him to say
'folk of fire'), [FN#277] what aileth you?' Said she, 'The cold
and the night trouble us.' He asked, 'What aileth these little
people that they weep?'; and she answered, 'They are hungry.' He
enquired, 'And what is in this cauldron?'; and she replied, 'It
is what I quiet them withal, and Allah will question Omar bin al-
Khattab of them, on the Day of Doom.' He said, 'And what should
Omar know of their case?' 'Why then,' rejoined she, 'should he
manage people's affairs and yet be unmindful of them?' Thereupon
Omar turned to me (continned Aslam) and cried, 'Come with us!' So
we set off running till we reached the pay department of his
treasury, where he took out a sack containing flour and a pot
holding fat and said to me, 'Load these on my back!' Quoth I, 'O
Commander of the Faithful, I will carry them for thee.' He
rejoined, 'Wilt thou bear my load for me on the Day of
Resurrection?' So I put the things on his back, and we set off,
running, till we threw down the sack hard by her.  Then he took
out some of the flour and put it in the cauldron; and, saying to
the woman, 'Leave it to me,' he began blowing the fire under the
cauldron.  Now he was a long bearded man [FN#278] and I saw the
smoke issuing from between the hairs of his beard till the flour
was cooked, when he took some of the fat and threw it in and said
to the woman, 'Bed them while I cool it for them.' So they fell
to eating till they had eaten their fill, and he left the rest
with her.  Then he turned to me and said, 'O Aslam, I see it was
indeed hunger made them weep; and I am glad I did not go away ere
I found out the cause of the light I saw.'--And Shahrazad per
ceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

              When it was the Sixty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Nuzhat al-
Zaman continued, "It is related that Omar passed by a flock of
sheep, kept by a Mameluke, and asked him to sell him a sheep.  He
answered, 'They are not mine.' 'Thou art the man I sought,' said
Omar, and bought him and freed him; whereupon the slave
exclaimed, 'O Allah, as thou hast bestowed on me the lesser
emancipation; so vouchsafe me the greater!' [FN#279] It is also
said that Omar bin al- Khattab was wont to give his servants
sweet milk and himself eat coarse fare, and to clothe them softly
and himself wear rough garments.  He rendered unto all men their
due, and exceeded in his giving to them.  He once gave a man four
thousand dirhams and added thereto a thousand, wherefore it was
said to him, 'Why dost thou not increase to thy son as thou
increasest to this man?' He answered, 'This man's father stood
firm at the battle day of Ohod.' [FN#280] Al-Hasan relates that
Omar once came back from foray with much money, and that
Hafsah [FN#281] approached him and said, 'O Commander of the
Faithful, the due of kinship!' 'O Hafsah!' replied he, 'verily
Allah hath enjoined us to satisfy the dues of kinship, but not
with the monies of the True Believers.  Indeed, thou pleasest"
thy family, but thou angerest thy father.' And she went away
trailing her skirts. [FN#282]  The son of Omar said, 'I implored
the Lord to show me my father one year after his death, till at
last I saw him wiping the sweat from his brow and asked him, 'How
is it with thee, O my father?' He answered, 'But for my Lord's
mercy thy father surely had perished.' Then said Nuzhat al-Zaman,
"Hear, O auspicious King, the second division of the first
chapter of the instances of the followers of the Apostle and
other holy men.  Saith Al Hasan al-Basri, [FN#283] Not a soul of
the sons of Adam goeth forth of the world without regretting
three things,- failure to enjoy what he hath amassed, failure to
compass what he hoped, failure to provide himself with sufficient
viaticum for that hereto he goeth. [FN#284] It was said of
Sufyan, [FN#285] 'Can a man be a religious and yet possess
wealth?' He replied, 'Yes, so he be patient when grieved and be
thankful when he hath received.' Abdullah bin Shaddad, being
about to die, sent for his son Mohammed and admonished him,
saying, 'O my son, I see the Summoner of Death summoning me, and
so I charge thee to fear Allah both in public and private, to
praise Allah and to be soothfastin thy speech, for such praise
bringeth increase of prosperity, and piety in itself is the best
of provision for the next world; even as saith one of the poets,

'I see not happiness lies in gathering gold; * The man most pious
     is man happiest:
In truth the fear of God is best of stores, * And God shall make
     the pious choicely blest.'

Then quoth Nuzhat al-Zaman, "Let the King also give ear to these
notes from the second section of the first chapter." He asked her
'What be they?'; and she answered, "When Omar bin Abd al-Aziz [FN#
286] succeeded to the Caliphate, he went to his household and
laying hands on all that was in their hold, put it into the
public treasury.  So the Banu Umayyah flew for aid to his
father's sister, Fatimah, daughter of Marwan, and she sent to him
saying, 'I must needs speak to thee.' So she came to him by night
and, when he had made her alight from her beast and sit down, he
said to her, 'O aunt, it is for thee to speak first, since thou
hast some thing to ask: tell me then what thou wouldst with me.'
Replied she, 'O Commander of the Faithful, it is thine to speak
first, for thy judgment perceiveth that which is hidden from the
intelligence of others.' Then said Omar, 'Of a verity Allah
Almighty sent Mohammed as a blessing to some and a bane to
others; and He elected for him those with him, and commissioned
him as His Apostle and took him to Himself,'--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

               When it was the Sixty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Nuzhat al-
Zaman continued thus, "Said Omar, 'Verily Allah commissioned as
His Apostle Mohammed (upon whom be the benediction of Allah and
His salvation!), for a blessing to some and a bane to others; and
He elected for him those with him and took him to Himself,
leaving the people a stream whereof they might drink.  After him
Abu Bakr [FN#287] the Truth teller became Caliph and he left the
river as it was, doing what was pleasing to Allah.  Then arose
Omar and worked a work and strove in holy war and strife where of
none might do the like.  But when Othman arose to power he
diverted a streamlet from the stream, and Mu'awiyah in his turn
diverted from it several streamlets; and without ceasing in like
manner, Yezid and the Banu Marwan such as Abd al-Malik and Walid
and Sulayman [FN#288] drew away water from the stream, and the
main course dried up, till rule devolved upon me, and now I am
minded to restore the stream to its normal condition.' When
Fatimah heard this, she said, 'I came wishing only to speak and
confer with thee, but if this be thy word, I have nothing to say
to thee.' Then she returned to the Ommiades and said to them,
'Now take ye the consequences of your act when ye allied
yourselves by marriage with Omar bin al-Khattab.' [FN#289]  And it
is also said that when Omar was about to die, he gathered his
children round him, and Maslamah [FN#290] bin Abd al-Malik said to
him, 'O Prince of the Faithful, how wilt thou leave thy children
paupers and thou their protector?  None can hinder thee in thy
lifetime from giving them what will suffice them out of the
treasury; and this indeed were better than leaving the good work
to him who shall rule after thee.' Omar looked at him with a look
of wrath and wonder and presently replied, 'O Maslamah, I have
defended them from this sin all the days of my life, and shall I
make them miserable after my death?  Of a truth my sons are like
other men, either obedient to Almighty Allah who will prosper
them, or disobedient and I will not help them in their
disobedience.  Know, O Maslamah, that I was present, even as
thou, when such an one of the sons of Marwanwas buried, and I
fell asleep by him and saw him in a dream given over to one of
the punishments of Allah, to whom belong Honour and Glory!  This
terrified me and made me tremble, and I vowed to Allah, that if
ever I came to power, I would not do such deeds as the dead man
had done.  I have striven to fulfil this vow all the length of my
life and I hope to die in the mercy of my Lord.' Quoth Maslamah,
'A certain man died and I was present at his burial, and when all
was over I fell asleep and I saw him as a sleeper seeth a dream,
walking in a garden of flowing waters clad in white clothes.  He
came up to me and said: 'O Maslamah, it is for the like of this
that rulers should rule.' Many are the instances of this kind,
and quoth one of the men of authority, 'I used to milk the ewes
in the Caliphate of Omar bin Abd al-Aziz, and one day I met a
shepherd, among whose sheep I saw a wolf or wolves.  I thought
them to be dogs, for I had never before seen wolves; so I asked,
'What dost thou with these dogs?' 'They are not dogs, but
wolves,' answered the shepherd.  Quoth I, 'Can wolves be with
sheep and not hurt them?' Quoth he, 'When the head is whole, the
body is whole.' [FN#291] Omar bin Abd al-Aziz once preached from a
pulpit of clay and, after praising and glorifying Allah Almighty,
said three words as follows, 'O folk, make clean your inmost
hearts, that your outward lives may be dean to your brethren, and
abstain ye from the things of the world.  Know that between us
and Adam there is no one man alive among the dead.  Dead are Abd
al- Malik and those who forewent him, and Omar also shall die and
those who forewent him.' Asked Maslamah, 'O Commander of the
Faithful, an we set a pillow behind thee, wilt thou lean on it a
little while?' But Omar answered, 'I fear lest it be a fault
about my neck on Resurrection Day.' Then he gasped with the death
rattle and fell back in a faint; whereupon Fatimah cried out,
saying, 'Ho, Maryam!  Ho, Muzahim! [FN#292] Ho, such an one!  Look
to this man!' And she began to pour water on him weeping, till he
revived from his swoon; and, seeing her in tears said to her,
'What causeth thee to weep, O Fatimah?' She replied, 'O Commander
of the Faithful, I saw thee lying prostrate before us and thought
of thy prostration in death before Almighty Allah, of thy
departure from the world and of thy separation from us.  This is
what made me weep.' Answered he, 'Enough, O Fatimah, for indeed
thou exceedest.' Then he would have risen, but fell down and
Fatimah strained him to her and said, 'Thou art to me as my
father and my mother, O Commander of the Faithful!  We cannot
speak to thee, all of us.' Then quoth Nuzhat al-Zaman to her
brother Sharrkan and the four Kazis, "Here endeth the second
section of the first chapter."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

               When it was the Sixty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Nuzhat al-
Zaman said to her brother Sharrkan and the four Kazis, "Here
endeth the second section of the first chapter.  And it so
happened that Omar bin Abd al-Aziz wrote to the people of the
festival at Meccah as follows, 'I call Allah to witness, in the
Holy Month, in the Holy City and on the day of the Greater
Pilgrimage, [FN#293] that I am innocent of your oppression and of
his wrongs that doth wrong you, in that I have neither commanded
this nor purposed it, neither hath any report of aught thereof
hitherto reached me, nor have I compassed any knowledge thereof;
and I trust that a cause for pardon will be found in that none
hath authority from me to oppress any man, for I shall assuredly
be questioned concerning every one oppress.  And if any of my
officers swerve from the right and act otherwise than the Holy
Book and the Traditions of the Apostle do authorise, obey him not
so that he may return to the way of righteousness.' He said also
(Allah accept of him!), 'I do not wish to be relieved from death,
because it is the supreme thing for which the True Believer is
rewarded.' Quoth one of authority, 'I went to the Prince of the
Faithful, Omarbin Abd al-Aziz, who was then Caliph, and saw
before him twelve dirhams, which he ordered for deposit in the
public treasury.  So I said to him, 'O Commander of the Faithful,
thou impoverishest thy children and reducest them to beggary
having nothing whereon to live.  An thou wouldst appoint somewhat
by will to them and to those who are poor of the people of thy
house, it were well.' 'Draw near to me,' answered he: so I drew
near to him and he said, 'Now as for thy saying, 'Thou beggarest
thy children; provide for them and for the poor of thy
household,' it is without reason; for Allah of a truth will
replace me to my children and to the poor of my house, and He
will be their guardian.  Verily, they are like other men; he who
feareth Allah, right soon will Allah provide for him a happy
issue, and he that is addicted to sins, I will not up hold him in
his sin against Allah.' Then he summoned his sons who numbered
twelve, and when he beheld them his eyes dropped tears and
presently he said to them, 'Your Father is between two things;
either ye will be well to do, and your parent will enter the
fire, or ye will be poor and your parent will enter Paradise; and
your father's entry into Paradise is liefer to him than that ye
should be well to do. [FN#294] So arise and go, Allah be your
helper, for to Him I commit your affairs!' Khalid bin
Safwan [FN#295] said, 'Yusuf bin Omar [FN#296] accompanied me to
Hisham bin Abd al-Malik, [FN#297] and as I met him he was coming
forth with his kinsmen and attendants.  He alighted and a tent
was pitched for him.  When the people had taken their seats, I
came up to the side of the carpet whereon he sat reclining and
looked at him; and, waiting till my eyes met his eyes, bespoke
him thus, 'May Allah fulfil His bounty to thee, O Commander of
the Faithful, I have an admonition for thee, which hath come down
to us from the history of the Kings preceding thee!'  At this, he
sat up whenas he had been reclining and said to me, 'Bring what
thou hast, O son of Safwan!' Quoth I, 'O Commander of the
Faithful, one of the Kings before thee went forth in a time
before this thy time, to this very country and said to his
companions, 'Saw ye ever any state like mine and say me, hath
such case been given to any man even as it hath been given unto
me?' Now there was with him a man of those who survive to bear
testimony to Truth; upholders of the Right and wayfarers in its
highway, and he said to him, 'O King, thou askest of a grave
matter.  Wilt thou give me leave to answer?' 'Yes,' replied the
King, and the other said, 'Dost thou judge thy present state to
be short lasting or ever lasting?' 'It is temporary,' replied the
King.  'How then,' rejoined the man, 'do I see thee exulting in
that which thou wilt enjoy but a little while and whereof thou
wilt be questioned for a long while and for the rendering an
account whereof thou shalt be as a pledge which is pawned?' Quoth
the King, 'Whither shall I flee and what must I seek for me?'
'That thou abide in thy kingship,' replied the other, 'or else
robe thee in rags [FN#298] and apply thyself to obey Almighty
Allah thy Lord until thine appointed hour.  I will come to thee
again at daybreak.' Khalid bin Safwan further relates that the
man knocked at the door at dawn and behold, the King had put off
his crown and resolved to become an anchorite, for the stress of
his exhortation.  When Hisham bin Abd al-Malik heard this, he
wept till his beard was wet, and, bidding his rich apparel be put
off, shut himself up in his palace.  Then the grandees and
dependents came to Khalid and said, 'What is this thou hast done
with the Commander of the Faithful?  Thou hast troubled his
pleasure and disturbed his life!' Then quoth Nuzhat al-Zaman,
addressing herself to Sharrkan, "How many instances of admonition
are there not in this chapter!  Of a truth I cannot report all
appertaining to this head in a single sitting,"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

              When it was the Sixty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Nuzhat al-
Zaman continued, speaking to Sharrkan, "Know, O King, that in
this chapter be so many instances of admonition that of a truth I
cannot report all appertaining to this head in a single sitting
but, with length of days, O King of the age, all will be well."
There said the Kazis, "O King, of a truth this damsel is the
wonder of the world, and of our age the unique pearl!  Never
heard we her like in the length of time or in the length of our
lives." And they called down blessings on the King and went away. 
Then Sharrkan turned to his attendants and said, "Begin ye to
prepare the marriage festival and make ready food of all kinds."
So they forthright did his bidding as regards the viands, and he
commanded the wives of the Emirs and Wazirs and Grandees depart
not until the time of the wedding banquet and of the unveiling of
the bride.  Hardly came the period of afternoon prayer when the
tables were spread with whatso heart can desire or eye can
delight in of roast meats and geese and fowls; and the subjects
ate till they were satisfied.  Moreover, Sharrkan had sent for
all the singing women of Damascus and they were present, together
with every slave girl of the King and of the notables who knew
how to sing.  And they went up to the palace in one body.  When
the evening came and darkness starkened they lighted candles,
right and left, from the gate of the citadel to that of the
palace; and the Emirs and Wazirs and Grandees marched past before
King Sharrkan, whilst the singers and the tire women took the
damsel to dress and adorn her, but found she needed no adornment. 
Meantime King Sharrkan went to the Hammam and coming out, sat
down on his seat of estate, whilst they paraded the bride before
him in seven different dresses: after which they eased her of the
weight of her raiment and ornaments and gave such injunctions as
are enjoined upon virgins on their wedding nights.  Then Sharrkan
went in unto her and took her maidenhead; [FN#299] and she at once
conceived by him and, when she announced it, he rejoiced with
exceeding joy and commanded the savants to record the date of her
conception.  On the morrow he went forth and seated himself on
his throne, and the high officers came in to him and gave him
joy.  Then he called his private secretary and bade him write a
letter to his father, King Omar bin al-Nu'uman, saying that he
had bought him a damsel, who excels in learning and good breeding
and who is mistress of all kinds of knowledge.  Moreover he
wrote, "There is no help but that I send her to Baghdad to visit
my brother Zau al-Makan and my sister Nuzhat al-Zaman.  I have
set her free and married her and she hath conceived by me." And
he went on to praise her wit and salute his brother and sister
together with the Wazir Dandan and all the Emirs.  Then he sealed
the letter and despatched it to his father by a post courier who
was absent a whole month, after which time he returned with the
answer and presented it in the presence.  Sharrkan took it and
read as follows, "After the usual Bismillah, this is from the
afflicted distracted man, from him who hath lost his children and
home by bane and ban, King Omar bin al- Nu'uman, to his son
Sharrkan.  Know that, since thy departure from me, the place is
become contracted upon me, so that no longer I have power of
patience nor can I keep my secret: and the cause thereof is as
follows.  It chanced that when I went forth to hunt and course
Zau al-Makan sought my leave to fare Hijaz wards, but I, fearing
for him the shifts of fortune, forbade him therefrom until the
next year or the year after.  My absence while sporting and
hunting endured for a whole month"--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

              When it was the Sixty-eighth night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King Omar
bin al-Nu'uman wrote in his letter, "My absence while sporting
and hunting endured for a whole month, and when I returned I
found that thy brother and sister had taken somewhat of money and
had set out with the pilgrim caravan for pilgrimage by stealth. 
When I knew this, the wide world narrowed on me, O my son!  but I
awaited the return of the caravan, hoping that haply they would
come back with it.  Accordingly, when the palmers appeared I
asked concerning the twain, but they could give me no news of
them; so I donned mourning for them, being heavy at heart, and in
sleep I have no part and I am drowned in the tears of my eyes."
Then he wrote in verse,

"That pair in image quits me not one single hour, * Whom in my
     heart's most honourable place I keep:
Sans hope of their return I would not live one hour, * Without my
     dreams of them I ne'er would stretch me in sleep."

The letter went on, "And after the usual salutations to thee and
thine, I command thee neglect no manner of seeking news of them
for indeed this is a shame to us." When Sharrkan read the letter
he felt grief for his father and joy for the loss of his brother
and sister.  Then he took the missive and went in with it to
Nuzhat al-Zaman who knew not that he was her brother, nor he that
she was his sister, albeit he often visited her both by night and
by day till the months were accomplished and she sat down on the
stool of delivery.  Allah made the child birth easy to her and
she bare a daughter, whereupon she sent for Sharrkan and seeing
him she said to him, "This is thy daughter: name her as thou
wilt." Quoth he, "It is usual to name children on the seventh day
after birth. [FN#300]" Then he bent over the child to kiss it and
he saw, hung about its neck, a jewel, which he knew at once for
one of those which Princess Abrizah had brought from the land of
the Greeks.  Now when he saw the jewel hanging from his babe's
neck he recognised it right well, his senses fled and wrath
seized on him; his eyes rolled in rage and he looked at Nuzhat
al- Zaman and said to her, "Whence hadst thou this jewel, O slave
girl?" When she heard this from Sharrkan she replied, "I am thy
lady, and the lady of all in thy palace!  Art thou not ashamed to
say to me Slave girl?  I am a Queen, daughter of King Omar bin
al-Nu'uman." Hearing this, he was seized with trembling and hung
his head earthwards,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

               When it was the Sixty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Sharrkan heard these words, his heart fluttered and his colour
waxed yellow and he was seized with trembling and he hung his
head earthwards, for he knew that she was his sister by the same
father.  Then he lost his senses; and, when he revived, he abode
in amazement, but did not discover his identity to her and asked,
O my lady, say, art thou in sooth the daughter of King Omar bin
al- Nu'uman?" "Yes," answered she; and he continued, "Tell me the
cause of thy leaving thy sire and of thy being sold for a slave."
So she related to him all that had befallen her from beginning to
end, how she had left her brother sick in the Sanctified City,
Jerusalem, and how the Badawi had kidnapped her and had sold her
to the trader.  When Sharrkan heard this, he was certified of her
being his sister on the sword side and said to himself, "How can
I have my sister to wife?  By Allah, needs must I marry her to
one of my chamberlains; and, if the thing get wind, I will
declare that I divorced her before consummation and married her
to my Chief Chamberlain." Then he raised his head and sighing
said, "O Nuzhat al-Zaman, thou art my very sister and I cry: 'I
take refuge with Allah from this sin whereinto we have fallen,'
for I am Sharrkan, son of Omar bin al-Nu'uman." She looked at him
and knew he spoke the truth; and, becoming as one demented, she
wept and buffeted her face, exclaiming, "There is no Majesty and
there is no Might save in Allah!  Verily have we fallen into
mortal sin! [FN#301] What shall I do and what shall I say to my
father and my mother when they ask me, Whence hadst thou thy
daughter?" Quoth Sharrkan, "It were meetest that I marry thee to
my Chamberlain and let thee bring up my daughter in his house,
that none may know thou be my sister.  This hath befallen us from
Almighty Allah for a purpose of his own, and nothing shall cover
us but thy marriage with this Chamberlain, ere any know." Then he
fell to comforting her and kissing her head and she asked him,
"What wilt thou call the girl?" "Call her Kuzia Fakan," [FN#302]
answered he.  Then he gave the mother in marriage to the Chief
Chamberlain, and transferred her to his house with the child,
which they reared on the laps of the slave girls, and fed with
milk and dosed with powders.  Now all this occurred whilst the
brother, Zau al-Makan, still tarried with the Fireman at
Damascus.  One day there came to King Sharrkan a courier from his
father, with a letter which he took and read and found therein,
"After the Bismillah know, O beloved King, that I am afflicted
with sore affliction for the loss of my children: sleep ever
faileth me and wakefulness ever assaileth me.  I send thee this
letter that, as soon as thou receivest it, thou make ready the
monies and the tribute, and send them to us, together with the
damsel whom thou hast bought and taken to wife; for I long to see
her and hear her discourse; more especially because there hath
come to us from Roumland an old woman of saintly bearing and with
her be five damsels high bosomed virgins, endowed with knowledge
and good breeding and all arts and sciences befitting mortals to
know; and indeed tongue faileth me to describe this old woman and
these who with her wend; for of a truth they are compendiums of
perfections in learning and accomplishments.  As soon as I saw
them I loved them, and I wished to have them in my palace and in
the compass of my hand; for none of the Kings owneth the like of
them; so I asked the old woman their price and she answered, 'I
will not sell them but for the tribute of Damascus.' And I, by
Allah, did not hold this price exorbitant, indeed it is but
little, for each one of them is worth the whole valuation.  So I
agreed to that and took them into my palace, and they remain in
my possession.  Wherefore do thou forward the tribute to us that
the woman may return to her own country; and send to us the
damsel to the end that she may dispute with them before the
doctors; and, if she prevail over them, I will return her to thee
accompanied by the tribute of Baghdad."--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

               When it was the Seventieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King Omar
son of Al-Nu'uman said in his letter, "And send to us the damsel
to the end that she may dispute with them before the doctors and,
if she prevail over them, I will return her to thee accompanied
with the tribute of Baghdad." As soon as Sharrkan knew the
contents, he went in to his brother in law and said to him,
"Bring the damsel to whom I married thee;" and when she came he
showed her the letter and said, "O my sister!  what answer
wouldst thou advise me make to this letter?" Replied she, "Seek
advice from thyself!" and presently added (for she yearned after
her people and her native land), "Send me together with my
husband the Chamberlain, to Baghdad, that I may tell my father my
tale and let him know whatso befel me with the Badawi who sold me
to the merchant, and that I also inform him how thou boughtest me
of the trader and gavest me in marriage to the Chamberlain, after
setting me free." "Be it so," replied Sharrkan.  Then Sharrkan
took his daughter, Kuzia Fakan, and committed her to the charge
of the wet nurses and the eunuchs, and he made ready the tribute
in haste, bidding the Chamberlain travel with the Princess and
the treasure to Baghdad.  He also furnished him two travelling
litters one for himself and the other for his wife.  And the
Chamberlain replied, "To hear is to obey." Moreover Sharrkan
collected camels and mules and wrote a letter to his father and
committed it to the Chamberlain; then he bade farewell to his
sister, after he had taken the jewel from her and hung it round
his daughter's neck by a chain of pure gold; and she and her
husband set out for Baghdad the same night.  Now it so happened
that Zau al-Makan and his friend the Fireman had come forth from
the hut in which they were, to see the spectacle, and they beheld
camels and Bukhti [FN#303] dromedaries and bat-mules and torches
and lanterns alight; and Zau al-Makan enquired about the loads
and their owner and was told that it was the tribute of Damascus
going to King Omar bin al-Nu'uman, Lord of the City of Baghdad. 
He then asked, "Who be the leader of the caravan?" and they
answered, "The Head Chamberlain who hath married the damsel so
famous for learning and science." Thereupon Zau al-Makan wept
with bitter weeping and was minded of his mother and his father
and his sister and his native land, and he said to the Stoker, "I
will join this caravan and, little by little, will journey
homewards." Quoth the Fireman, "I would not suffer thee to travel
single handed from the Holy City to Damascus, then how shall I be
sure of thy safety when thou farest for Baghdad?  But I will go
with thee and care for thee till thou effectest thine object."
"With joy and good will," answered Zau al-Makan.  Then the
Fireman get him ready for the journey and hired an ass and threw
saddle bags over it and put therein something of provaunt; and,
when all was prepared, he awaited the passage of the caravan. 
And presently the Chamberlain came by on a dromedary and his
footmen about him.  Then Zau al-Ma ken mounted the ass and said
to his companion, "Do thou mount with me." But he replied, "Not
so: I will be thy servant." Quoth Zau al-Makan, "There is no help
for it but thou ride awhile." "'Tis well," quoth the Stoker; "I
will ride when I grow tired." Then said Zau al-Makan, "O my
brother, soon shalt thou see how I will deal with thee, when I
come to my own folk." So they fared on till the sun rose and,When
it was the hour of the noonday sleep [FN#304] the Chamberlain
called a halt and they alighted and reposed and watered their
camels.  Then he gave the signal for departure and, after five
days, they came to the city of Hamah, [FN#305] where they set down
and made a three days' halt;--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.

              When it was the Seventy-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that they halted
in the city of Hamah three days; they then fared forwards and
ceased not travelling till they reached another city.  Here also
they halted three days and thence they travelled till they
entered the province Diyar Bakr.  Here blew on them the breezes
of Baghdad, and Zau al-Makan bethought him of his father and
mother and native land, and how he was returning to his sire
without his sister: so he wept and sighed and complained, and his
regrets grew on him, and he began improvising these couplets,

"Sweetheart!  How long must I await by so long suffering teed? *
     Nor cometh messenger to tell me where thou dost abide:
Ah me!  in very sooth our meeting time was short enow: * Would
     Heaven shorter prove to me the present parting-tide!
Now trend my hand and open my robe and thou within shall sight *
     How wasted are the limbs of me and yet the waste I hide:
When say they 'Comfort take for loss of love' I but reply * 'By
     Allah, till the Day of Doom no comfort shall betide!' "

Thereupon said to him the Fireman, "Leave this weeping and
wailing, for we are near the Chamberlain's tent." Quoth Zau al-
Makan, "Needs must I recite somewhat of verse; haply it may
quench the fire of my heart." "Allah upon thee," cried the other,
"cease this lamentation till thou come to shine own country; then
do what thou wilt, and I will be with thee wherever thou art."
Replied Zau al-Makan, "By Allah!  I cannot forbear from this!"
Then he turned his face towards Baghdad and the moon was shining
brightly and shedding her light on the place, and Nuzhat al-Zaman
could not sleep that night, but was restless and called to mind
her brother and wept.  And while she was in tears, he heard Zau
al-Makan weeping and improvising the following distichs,

'Al-Yaman's [FN#306] leven-gleam I see, * And sore despair
     despaireth me
For friend who erst abode wi' me * Crowning my cup with gladdest
     gree:
It minds me o' one who jilted me * To mourn my bitter liberty.
Say sooth, thou fair sheet lightning!  shall * We meet once more
     in joy and glee?
O blamer!  spare to me thy blame * My Lord hath sent this dule to
     dree,
Of friend who left me, fain to flee; * Of Time that breeds
     calamity:
All bliss hath fled the heart of me * Since Fortune proved mine
     enemy.
He [FN#307] brimmed a bowl of merest pine, * And made me drain the
     dregs, did he:
I see me, sweetheart, dead and gone * Ere I again shall gaze on
     thee.
Time!  prithee bring our childhood back, * Restore our happy
     infancy,
When joy and safety 'joyed we * From shafts that now they shoot
     at me!
Who aids the hapless stranger wight, * That nights in fright and
     misery,
That wastes his days in lonely grief, * For 'Time's
     Delight' [FN#308] no more must be?
Doomed us despite our will to bear * The hands of base bores cark
     and care."

When he ended his verse he cried out and fell down in a fainting
fit.  This is how it fared with him; but as regards Nuzhat al-
Zaman, when she heard that voice in the night, her heart was at
rest and she rose and in her joy she called the Chief Eunuch, who
said to her, "What is thy will?" Quoth she, "Arise and bring me
him who recited verses but now." Replied he, "Of a truth I did
not hear him"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

             When it was the Seventy-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Nuzhat
Al-Zaman heard her brother reciting, she called the Chief Eunuch
and said to him, "Go, fetch me the man who is repeating this
poetry!" Replied he, "Of a truth I heard him not and I wot him
not and folks are all sleeping." But she said, "Whomsoever thou
seest awake, he is the reciter." So he went, yet found none on
wake save the Stoker; for Zau al-Makan was still insensible, and
when his companion saw the Eunuch standing by his head he was
afraid of him.  Then said the Eunuch, "Art thou he who repeated
poetry but now and my lady heard him?" The Stoker fancied that
the dame was wroth with the reciter; and, being afraid, he
replied, "By Allah, 'twas not I!" Rejoined the Eunuch, "Who then
was the reciter?: point him out to me.  Thou must know who it
was, seeing that thou art awake." The Fireman feared for Zau al-
Makan and said in himself, "Haply the Eunuch will do him some
hurt"; so he answered, "By Allah, I know not who it was." Said
the Eunuch, "By Allah, thou liest, for there is none on wake here
but thou!  So needs must thou know him." "By Allah," replied the
Fireman, "I tell thee the truth!: some passer by, some wayfarer
must have recited the verses and disturbed me and kept me awake;
Allah requite him!" Quoth the Eunuch, "If thou happen upon him,
point him out to me and I will lay hands on him and bring him to
the door of our lady's litter [FN#309] or do thou take him with
thine own hand." Said the Fireman, "Go thou back and I will bring
him to thee." So the Eunuch left him and went his ways; and,
going in to his mistress, told her all this and said to her,
"None knoweth who it was; it must have been some passer by, some
wayfarer." And she was silent.  Meanwhile, Zau al-Makan came to
himself and saw that the moon had reached the middle Heavens; the
breath of the dawn breeze [FN#310] breathed upon him and his heart
was moved to longing and sadness; so he cleared his throat and
was about to recite verses, when the Fire man asked him, "What
wilt thou do?" Answered Zau al-Makan, "I have a mind to repeat
somewhat of poetry, that I may quench therewith the fire of my
heart." Quoth the other, "Thou knowest not what befel me whilst
thou wast a faint, and how I escaped death only by beguiling the
Eunuch." "Tell me what happened," quoth Zau al-Makan.  Replied
the Stoker, "Whilst thou wast aswoon there came up to me but now
an Eunuch, with a long staff of almond tree wood in his hand, who
took to looking in all the people's faces, as they lay asleep,
and asked me who it was recited the verses, finding none awake
but myself.  I told him in reply it was some passerby, some
wayfarer; so he went away and Allah delivered me from him; else
had he killed me.  But first he said to me, 'If thou hear him
again, bring him to us.'" When Zau al-Makan heard this he wept
and said, "Who is it would forbid me to recite?  I will surely
recite, befal me what may; for I am near mine own land and care
for none." Rejoined the Fireman, "Thy design is naught save to
lose thy life;" and Zau al-Makan retorted, "Needs must I recite
verses." "Verily," said the Stoker, "needs must there be a
parting between me and thee in this place, albeit;I had intended
not to leave thee, till I had brought thee to thy native city and
reunited thee with thy mother and father.  Thou hast now tarried
with me a year and a half and I have never harmed thee in aught. 
What ails thee, then, that thou must needs recite verses, seeing
that we are tired out with walking and watching and all the folk
are asleep, for they require sleep to rest them of their
fatigue?" But Zau al-Makan answered, "I will not be turned away
from my purpose." [FN#311]  Then grief moved him and he threw off
concealment and began repeating these couplets,

"Stand thou by the homes and hail the lords of the ruined stead;
     * Cry thou for an answer, belike reply to thee shall be
     sped:
If the night and absence irk thy spirit kindle a torch * Wi'
     repine; and illuminate the gloom with a gleaming greed:
If the snake of the sand dunes hiss, I shall marvel not at all! 
     * Let him bite so I bite those beauteous lips of the
     luscious red:
O Eden, my soul hath fled in despite of the maid I love: * Had I
     lost hope of Heaven my heart in despair were dead."

And he also improvised the two following distichs,

"We were and were the days enthralled to all our wills, *
     Dwelling in union sweet and homed in fairest site:
Who shall restore the home of the beloved, where showed * Light
     of the Place for aye conjoined with Time's
     Delight?'' [FN#312]

And as he ceased his verses, he shrieked three shrieks and fell
senseless to the ground and the Fireman rose and covered him. 
When Nuzhat al-Zaman heard the first improvisation, she called to
mind her father and her mother and her brother and their whilome
home; then she wept and cried at the Eunuch and said to him, "Woe
to thee!  He who recited the first time hath recited a second
time and I heard him hard by.  By Allah, an thou fetch him not to
me, I will assuredly rouse the Chamberlain on thee, and he shall
beat thee and cast thee out.  But take these hundred diners and
give them to the singer and bring him to me gently, and do him no
hurt.  If he refuse, hand to him this purse of a thousand diners,
then leave him and return to me and tell me, after thou hast
informed thyself of his place and his calling and what countryman
he is.  Return quickly and linger not."--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

              When it was the Seventy-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Nuzhat al-
Zaman sent the Eunuch to make enquiries concerning the singer and
said, "Beware how thou come back to me and report, I could not
find him." So the Eunuch went out and laid about the people and
trod in their tents, but found none awake, all being asleep for
weariness, till he came to the Stoker and saw him sitting up,
with his head uncovered.  So he drew near and seizing him by the
hand, said to him, "It was thou didst recite the verses!" The
Fireman was afeard for his life and replied, "No, by Allah, O
chief of the people, it was not I!" But the Eunuch said, "I will
not leave thee till thou show me who it was that recited the
verses, for I dread returning to my lady without him." Now when
the Fireman heard these words he feared for Zau al-Makan and wept
with exceeding weeping and said to the Eunuch, "By Allah, it was
not I, and I know him not.  I only heard some passer by, some
wayfarer, recite verses: so do not thou commit sin on me, for I
am a stranger and come from the Holy City of Jerusalem; and
Abraham, the friend of Allah, be with you all." "Rise up and fare
with me," rejoined the Eunuch, "and tell my lady this with thine
own mouth, for I have seen none awake save thyself." Quoth the
Stoker, "Hast thou not come and seen me sitting in the place
where I now am, and dost thou not know my station?  Thou wottest
none can stir from his place, except the watchman seize him.  So
go thou to thy station and if thou again meet any one after this
hour reciting aught of poetry, whether he be near or far, it will
be I or some one I know, and thou shalt not learn of him but by
me." Then he kissed the Eunuch's head and spake him fair till he
went away; but the Castrato fetched a round and, returning
secretly, came and stood behind the Fireman, fearing to go back
to his mistress without tidings.  As soon as he was gone, the
Stoker arose and aroused Zau al-Makan and said to him, "Come, sit
up, that I may tell thee what hath happened." So Zau al-Makan sat
up, and his companion told him what had passed, and he answered,
"Let me alone; I will take no heed of this and I care for none,
for I am mine own country." [FN#313] Quoth the Stoker, "Why wilt
thou obey thy flesh and the devil?  If thou fear no one, I fear
for thee and for my life, so Allah upon thee!  recite nothing
more of verses till thou come to thine own land.  Indeed, I had
not deemed thee so ill conditioned.  Dost thou not know that this
lady is the wife; of the Chamberlain and is minded to chastise
thee for disturbing her?  Belike, she is ill or restless for
fatigue of the journey and the distance of the place from her
home, and this is the second time she hath sent the Eunuch to
look for thee." However Zau al-Makan paid no heed to the
Fireman's words but cried out a third time and began versifying
with these couplets,

"I fly the carper's injury,* Whose carping sorely vexeth me:
He chides and taunts me, wotting not * He burns me but more
     grievously.
The blamer cries 'He is consoled!' * I say, 'My own dear
     land [FN#314] to see:'
They ask, 'Why be that land so dear?' * I say, 'It taught me in
     love to be:'
They ask, 'What raised its dignity?' * I say, 'What made my
     ignomy:'
Whate'er the bitter cup I drain, * Far be fro' me that land to
     flee:
Nor will I bow to those who blame, * And for such love would deal
     me shame.

Hardly had he made an end of his verses and come to a conclusion,
when the Eunuch (who had heard him from his hiding place at his
head) came up to him; whereupon the Fireman flea end stood afar
off to see what passed between them.  Then said the Eunuch to Zau
al-Makan, "Peace be with thee, O my lord!" "And on thee be
peace," replied Zau al-Makan, "and the mercy of Allah and His
blessings!" "O my lord," continued the Eunuch---And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say,

             When it was the Seventy-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Eunuch
said to Zau al-Makan, "O my lord, I have sought thee these
several times this night, for my mistress biddeth thee to her."
Quoth Zau al- Makan, "And who be this bitch that seeketh for me? 
Allah curse her and curse her husband with her!" [FN#315] And he
began to revile the Eunuch, who could make him no answer, because
his mistress had charged him to do Zau al-Makan no hurt, nor
bring him save of his own especial free will; and, if he would
not accompany him, to give him the thousand diners.  So the
Castrato began to speak him fair and say to him, "O my lord, take
this purse and go with me.  We will do thee no upright, O my son,
nor wrong thee in aught; but our object is that thou bend thy
gracious steps with me to my mistress, to receive her answer and
return in weal and safety: and thou shalt have a handsome present
as one who bringeth good news." When Zau al- Makan heard this, he
arose and went with the Eunuch and walked among the sleeping
folk, stepping over them; whilst the Fireman followed after them
from afar, and kept his eye upon him and said to himself, "Alas
the pity of his youth!  Tomorrow they will hang him." And he
ceased not following them till he approached their
station, [FN#316] without any observing him.  Then he stood still
and said, "How base it will be of him, if he say it was I who
bade him recite the verses!" This was the case of the Stoker; but
as regards what befel Zau al-Makan, he ceased not walking with
the Eunuch till he reached his station and the Castrato went in
to Nuzhat al-Zaman and said, "O my lady, I have brought thee him
whom thou soughtest, and he is a youth, fair of face and bearing
the marks of wealth and gentle breeding." When she heard this,
her heart fluttered and she cried, "Let him recite some verses,
that I may hear him near hand, and after ask him his name and his
condition and his native land." Then the Eunuch went out to Zau
al-Makan and said to him, "Recite what verses thou knowest, for
my lady is here hard by, listening to thee, and after I will ask
thee of thy name and thy native country and thy condition."
Replied he, "With love and gladness but, an thou ask my name, it
is erased and my trace is unplaced and my body a waste.  I have a
story, the beginning of which is not known nor can the end of it
be shown, and behold, I am even as one who hath exceeded in wine
drinking and who hath not spared himself; one who is afflicted
with distempers and who wandereth from his right mind, being
perplexed about his case and drowned in the sea of thought." When
Nuzhat al-Zaman heard this, she broke out into excessive weeping
and sobbing, and said to the Eunuch, "Ask him if he have parted
from one he loveth even as his mother or father." The Castrato
asked as she bade him, and Zau al-Makan replied, "Yes, I have
parted from every one I loved: but the dearest of all to me was
my sister, from whom Fate hath separated me." When Nuzhat al-
Zaman heard this, she exclaimed, "Allah Almighty reunite him with
what he loveth!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

              When it was the Seventy-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Nuzhat
al-Zaman heard his words she said, "Allah reunite him with what
he loveth!" Then quoth she to the Eunuch, "Tell him to let me
hear somewhat anent his separation from his countrymen and his
country." The Eunuch did so, and Zau al-Makan sighed heavily and
began repeating these couplets, [FN#317]

"Is not her love a pledge by all mankind confest?  * The house
     that hometh Hinda be forever blest'
Her love all levels; man can reck of naught beside; * Naught or
     before or after can for man have zest
'Tis though the vale is paved with musk and ambergris * That day
     when Hinda's footstep on its face is prest:
Hail to the beauty of our camp, the pride of folk, * The dearling
     who en' Slaves all hearts by her behest:
Allah on 'Time's Delight' send large dropped clouds that teem *
     With genial rain but bear no thunder in their breast."

And also these,

"I vow to Allah if at home I sight * My sister Nuzhat al-Zamani
     highs
I'll pass the days in joyance and delight * Mid bashful minions,
     maidens soft and white:
To sound of harps in various modes they smite * Draining the
     bowl, while eyes rain lively light
'Neath half closed lids, a sipping lips red bright * By stream
     bank flowing through my garden site."

When he had finished his verse, Nuzhat al-Zaman lifted up a skirt
of the litter curtain and looked at him.  As soon as her eyes
fell on his face, she knew him for certain and cried out, "O my
brother!  O Zau al-Makan!" He also looked at her and knew her and
cried out, "O my sister!  O Nuzhat al-Zaman!" Then she threw
herself upon him and he gathered her to his bosom and the twain
fell down in a fainting fit.  When the Eunuch saw this case, he
wondered at them and throwing over them somewhat to cover them,
waited till they should recover.  After a while they came to
themselves, and Nuzhat al-Zaman rejoiced with exceeding joy:
oppression and depression left her and gladness took the mastery
of her, and she repeated these verses,

"Time sware my life should fare in woeful waste; * Forsworn art
     Time, expiate thy sin in haste! [FN#318]
Comes weal and comes a welcome friend to aid; * To him who brings
     good news, rise, gird thy waist
I spurned old world tales of Eden bliss; * Till came I
     Kausar [FN#319] on those lips

When Zau al-Makan heard this, he pressed his sister to his
breast; tears streamed from his eyes for excess of joy and he
repeated these couplets, [FN#320]

"Long I lamented that we fell apart, * While tears repentant
     railed from these eyne;
And sware, if Time unite us twain once more, * 'Severance' shall
     never sound from tongue of mine:
Joy hath so overwhelmed me that excess * Of pleasure from mine
     eyes draws gouts of brine:
Tears, O mine eyes, have now become your wont * Ye weep for
     pleasure and you weep for pine!"

They sat awhile at the litter door till she said to him, "Come
with me into the litter and tell me all that hath befallen thee,
and I will tell thee what happened to me." So they entered and
Zau al-Maken said, "Do thou begin thy tale." Accordingly she told
him all that had come to her since their separation at the Khan
and what had happened to her with the Badawi; how the merchant
had bought her of him and had taken her to her brother Sharrkan
and had sold her to him; how he had freed her at the time of
buying; how he had made a marriage contract with her and had gone
in to her and how the King, their sire, had sent and asked for
her from Sharrkan.  Then quoth she, "Praised be Allah who hath
vouchsafed thee to me and ordained that, even as we left our
father together, so together shall we return to him!" And she
added, "Of a truth my brother Sharrkan gave me in marriage to
this Chamberlain that he might carry me to my father.  And this
is what befel me from first to last; so now tell me how it hath
fared with thee since I left thee." Thereupon he told her all
that had happened to him from beginning to end; and how Allah
vouchsafed to send the Fireman to him, and how he had journeyed
with him and spent his money on him and had served him night and
day.  She praised the Stoker for this and Zau al-Makan added, "Of
a truth, O my sister, this Fireman hath dealt with me in such
benevolent wise as would not lover with lass nor sire with son,
for that he fasted and gave me to eat, and he walked whilst he
made me ride; and I owe my life to him." Said she, "Allah
willing, we will requite him for all this, according to our
power." Then she called the Eunuch, who came and kissed Zau al-
Makan's hand, and she said, "Take thy reward for glad tidings, O
face of good omen!  It was thy hand reunited me with my brother;
so the purse I gave thee and all in it are thine.  But now go to
thy master and bring him quickly to me." The Castrato rejoiced
and, going in to the Chamberlain, him to his mistress. 
Accordingly, he came in to his wife and finding Zau al-Makan with
her, asked who he was.  So she told him all that had befallen
them both, first and last, and added, "Know, O Chamberlain, that
thou hast married no slave girl; far from it, thou hast taken to
wife the daughter of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman for I am Nuzhat al-
Zaman, and this is my brother, Zau al-Makan." When the
Chamberlain heard the story he knew it to be sooth, and its
manifest truth appeared to him and he was certified that he was
become King Omar bin al-Nu'uman's son in law, so he said to
himself, " 'Twill be my fate to be made viceroy of some
province." [FN#321] Then he went up to Zau al-Makan and gave him
joy of his safety and reunion with his sister, and bade his
servants forthwith make him ready a tent and one of the best of
his own horses to ride.  Thereupon said Nuzhat al-Zaman, "We are
now near our country and I would be left alone with my brother,
that we may enjoy each other's company and take our fill of it
ere we reach Baghdad; for we have been parted a long, long time."
"Be it as thou biddest," replied the Chamberlain, and, going
forth from them, sent them wax candles and various kinds of
sweetmeats, together with three suits of the costliest for Zau
al-Makan.  Then he returned to the litter and related the good he
had done and Nuzhat al-Zaman said to him, "Bid the Eunuch bring
me the Fireman and give him a horse to ride and ration him with a
tray of food morning and evening, and let him be forbidden to
leave us." The Chamberlain called the Castrato and charged him to
do accordingly; so he replied, "I hear and I obey;" and he took
his pages with him and went out in search of the Stoker till he
found him in the rear of the caravan, girthing his ass and
preparing for flight.  The tears were running adown his cheeks,
out of fear for his life and grief for his separation from Zau
al-Makan; and he was saying to himself, "Indeed, I warned him for
the love of Allah, but he would not listen to me; Oh would I knew
what is become of him!" Ere he had done speaking the Eunuch was
standing by his head whilst the pages surrounded him The Fireman
turned and seeing the Eunuch and the pages gathered around him
became yellow with fear,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

              When it was the Seventy-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Stoker girthed his ass for flight and bespake himself, saying,
"Oh would I knew what is become of him!"; ere he had done
speaking the Castrato was standing by his head and his side
muscles quivered for fear and he lifted up his voice and cried,
"Verily he knoweth not the value of the good offices I have done
him!  I believe he hath denounced me to the Eunuch (hence these
pages et about me) and he hath made me an accomplice in his
crime." Then the effeminated one cried at him, saying, "Who was
it recited the verses?  O liar!  why didst thou say, 'I never
repeated these couplets, nor do I know who repeated them;' when
it was thy companion?  But now I will not leave thee between this
place and Baghdad, and what betideth thy comrade shall betide
thee." Quoth the Fireman, "What I feared hath befallen me." And
he repeated this couplet,

"'Twas as I feared the coming ills discerning: * But unto Allah
     we are all returning."

Then the Eunuch cried upon the pages, saying, "Take him off the
ass." So they carried him along with the caravan, surrounded by
the pages, as the white contains the black of the eye; and the
Castrato said to them, "If a hair of him be lost, you will be
lost with it." And he bade them privily treat him with honour and
not humiliate him.  But when the Stoker saw himself beset by the
pages, he despaired of his life and turning to the Eunuch, said
to him, "O Chief, I am neither this youth's brother nor am I akin
to him, nor is he sib to me; but I was a Fireman in a Hammam and
found him cast out, in his sickness, on the dung heap." Then the
caravan fared on and the Stoker wept and imagined in himself a
thousand things, whilst the Eunuch walked by his side and told
him nothing, but said to him, "Thou disturbedst our mistress by
reciting verses, thou and this youth: but fear nothing for thy
self;" and kept laughing at him the while to himself.  Whenever
the caravan halted, they served him with food, and he and the
Castrato ate from one dish. [FN#322] Then the Eunuch bade his lads
bring a gugglet of sugared sherbet and, after drinking himself,
gave it to the Fireman, who drank; but all the while his tears
never dried, out of fear for his life and grief for his
separation from Zau al-Makan and for what had befallen them in
their strangerhood.  So they both travelled on with the caravan,
whilst the Chamberlain now rode by the door of his wife's litter,
in attendance on Zau al-Makan and his sister, and now gave an eye
to the Fireman; and Nuzhat al-Zaman and her brother occupied
themselves with converse and mutual condolence; and they ceased
not after this fashion till they came within three days' journey
from Baghdad.  Here they alighted at eventide and rested till the
morning morrowed; and as they awoke and they were about to load
the beasts, behold, there appeared afar off a great cloud of dust
that darkened the firmament till it became black as gloomiest
night. [FN#323] Thereupon the Chamberlain cried out to them,
"Stay, and your loading delay!"; then, mounting with his
Mamelukes, rode forward in the direction of the dust cloud.  When
they drew near, suddenly appeared under it a numerous conquering
host like the full tide sea, with flags and standards, drums and
kettledrums, horsemen and footmen.  The Chamberlain marvelled at
this; and when the troops saw him, there detached itself from
amongst them a plump of five hundred cavaliers, who fell upon him
and his suite and surrounded them, five for one; whereupon said
he to them, "What is the matter and what are these troops, that
ye do this with us?" Asked they, "Who art thou; and whence comest
thou, and whither art thou bound?" and he answered, "I am the
Chamberlain of the Emir of Damascus, King Sharrkan, son of Omar
bin al-Nu'uman, Lord of Baghdad and of the land of Khorasan, and
I bring tribute and presents from him to his father in Baghdad."
When the horsemen heard his words they let their head kerchiefs
fall over their faces and wept, saying, "In very sooth King Omar
is dead and he died not but of poison.  So fare ye forwards; no
harm shall befal you till you join his Grand Wazir, Dandan." Now
when the Chamberlain heard this, he wept sore and exclaimed, "Oh
for our disappointment in this our journey!" Then he and all his
suite wept till they had come up with the host and sought access
to the Wazir Dandan, who granted an interview and called a halt
and, causing his pavilion to be pitched, sat down on a couch
therein and commanded to admit the Chamberlain.  Then he bade him
be seated and questioned him; and he replied that he was
Chamberlain to the Emir of Damascus and was bound to King Omar
with presents and the tribute of Syria.  The Wazir, hearing the
mention of King Omar's name, wept and said, "King Omar is dead by
poison, and upon his dying the folk fell out amongst themselves
as to who should succeed him, until they were like to slay one
another on this account; but the notables and grandees and the
four Kazis interposed and all the people agreed to refer the
matter to the decision of the four judges and that none should
gainsay them.  So it was agreed that we go to Damascus and fetch
thence the King's son, Sharrkan, and make him Sultan over his
father's realm.  And amongst them were some who would have chosen
the cadet, Zau Al-Makan, for, quoth they, his name be Light of
the Place, and he hath a sister Nuzhat al-Zaman highs, the
Delight of the Time; but they set out five years ago for Al-Hijaz
and none wotteth what is become of them." When the Chamberlain
heard this, he knew; that his wife had told him the truth of her
adventures; and he grieved with sore grief for the death of King
Omar, albeit he joyed with exceeding joy, especially at the
arrival of Zau al-Makan, for that he would now become Sultan of
Baghdad in his father's stead--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

             When it was the Seventy-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Sharrkan's Chamberlain heard of the death of King Omar bin al-
Nu'uman he mourned, but he rejoiced because of his wife and her
brother Zau al-Makan who would become Sultan of Baghdad in his
father's stead.  So he turned to the Wazir Dandan and said to
him, "Verily your tale is a wonder of wonders!  Know, O Chief
Wazir, that here, where you have encountered me, Allah hath given
you rest from fatigue and bringeth you your desire after the
easiest of fashions, for that His Almighty Will restoreth to you
Zau al-Makan and his sister Nuzhat al-Zaman; whereby we will
settle the matter as we easily can." When the Minister heard
these words he rejoiced with great joy and said, "O Chamberlain,
tell me the tale of the twain and what befel them and the cause
of their long absence." So he repeated to him the whole story and
told him that Nuzhat al-Zaman was his wife and related to him the
adventures of Zau al-Makan from first to last.  As soon as he had
ended his tale, the Wazir sent for the Emirs and Wazirs and Chief
Officers and acquainted them with the matter; whereat they
rejoiced with great joy and wondered at the happy chance.  Then
they gathered in a body and went in to the Chamberlain and did
their service to him, kissing the ground between his hands; and
the Wazir Dandan also rose and went out to meet him and stood
before him in honour.  After this, the Chamberlain held on that
day a Divan council; and he and the Wazir sat upon a throne,
whilst all the Emirs and Grandees and Officers of State took
their places before them, according to their several
ranks. [FN#324] Then they melted sugar in rose water and drank,
after which the Emirs sat down to hold council and permitted the
rest of the host to mount and ride forward leisurely, till they
should make an end of their debate and overtake them.  So the
officers kissed the ground between their hands and mounting, rode
onwards, preceded by the standards of war.  When the grandees had
finished their conference, they took horse and rejoined the host;
and the Chamberlain approached the Wazir Dandan and said, "I deem
it well to ride on before you, and precede you, that I may get
ready a place for the Sultan and notify him of your coming and of
your choosing him as Sultan over the head of his brother
Sharrkan." "Aright thou reckest," answered the Wazir Then the
Chamberlain rose up in haste and Dandan also stood up to do him
honour and brought him presents, which he conjured him to accept. 
In similar guise did all the Emirs and Grandees and Officers of
State, bringing him gifts and calling down blessings on him and
saying to him, "Haply thou wilt mention our case to Sultan Zau
al-Makan and speak to him to continue us in our
dignities." [FN#325] The Chamberlain promised all they required
and bade his pages be ready to march, whereupon the Wazir Dandan
sent with him tents and bade the tent pitchers set them up at a
day's journey from the city.  And they did his bidding.  Then the
Chamberlain mounted and rode forward, full of joy and saying to
himself, "How blessed is this gurney!", and indeed his wife was
exalted in his eyes, she and her brother Zau al-Makan.  They made
all haste over their wayfare, till they reached a place distant a
day's journey from Baghdad, where the Chamberlain called a halt
for rest, and bade his men alight and make ready a sitting place
for the Sultan Zau al-Makan, son of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman,
while he rode forward with his Mamelukes and, alighting at a
distance from Nuzhat al-Zaman's litter, commanded the eunuchs to
ask leave of admission to the presence.  They did so and she gave
permission; whereupon he went in to her and conversed with her
and her brother; and told them of the death of their father; and
of Zau al-Makan, how the heads of the people had made him King
over them in the stead of his sire; and he gave them joy of the
kingdom.  They both wept for their father and asked the manner of
his being killed; but the Chamberlain answered, "The news rests
with the Wazir Dandan who will be here tomorrow leading all the
host; and it only remaineth for thee, O King, to do what they
counsel, since they have unanimously chosen thee Sultan; for if
thou do not this, they will choose some one else and thou canst
not be sure of thy life with another Sultan.  Haply he will kill
thee, or discord may befal between you twain and the kingdom pass
out of the hands of both." Zau al-Makan bowed his head awhile and
then said, "I accept this position;" for indeed there was no
refusing; and he was certified that the Chamberlain had
counselled him well and wisely and set him on the right way. 
Then he added, "O my uncle, how shall I do with my brother
Sharrkan?" "O my son," replied the Chamberlain, "thy brother will
be Sultan of Damascus and thou Sultan of Baghdad; so take heart
of grace and get ready thy case." Zau al-Makan accepted this and
the Chamberlain presented him with a suit of royal raiment and a
dagger [FN#326] of state, which the Wazir Dandan had brought with
him; then leaving him he bade the tent pitchers choose a spot of
rising ground and set up thereon a spacious pavilion, wherein the
Sultan might sit to receive the Emirs and Grandees.  Moreover he
ordered the kitcheners to cook rich viands and serve them and he
commanded the water carriers to dispose the water troughs.  They
did as he bade them and presently arose a cloud of dust from the
ground and spread till it walled the horizon round.  After
awhile, the dust dispersed and there appeared under it the army
of Baghdad and Khorasan, a conquering host like the full tide
sea.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

             When it was the Seventy-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Chamberlain bade the tent pitchers set up a pavilion spacious
enough to receive the subjects flocking to their Sultan, they
planted a splendid Shahmiyanah [FN#327] befitting Kings.  And as
they ended their labours behold, a dust cloud spired aloft and
the breeze made it lift and beneath it showed a conquering host;
and presently it appeared that this was the army of Baghdad and
Khorasan preceded by the Wazir Dandan.  And in it all rejoiced at
the accession of the "Light of the Place." Now Zau al-Makan had
donned robes of royal estate and girt himself with the sword of
state: so the Chamberlain brought him a steed and he mounted
surrounded by the Mamelukes and all the company from the tents on
foot, to do him service, and he rode on until he came to the
great pavilion, where he sat down and he laid the royal dagger
across his thighs, whilst the Chamberlain stood in attendance on
him and his armed slaves stationed themselves under the entrance
awning of the Shahmiyanah, with drawn swords in their hands. 
Presently, up came the troops and the host and craved admission
so the Chamberlain went in to Zau al-Makan and asked his leave
whereupon he bade admit them, ten by ten.  The Chamberlain
acquainted them with the King's commands, to which they replied,
"We hear and we obey;" and all drew up before the pavilion
entrance.  Then he took ten of them and carried them through the
vestibule into the presence of Sultan Zau al-Makan, whom when
they saw, they were awed; but he received them with most gracious
kindness and promised them all good.  So they gave him joy of his
safe return and invoked Allah's blessings upon him after which
they took the oath of fealty never to gainsay him in aught and
they kissed ground before him and withdrew.  Then other ten
entered and he entreated them as he had entreated the ethers; and
they ceased not to enter, ten by ten, till none was left but the
Wazir Dandan.  Lastly the Minister went in and kissed the ground
before Zau al-Makan, who rose to meet him, saying, "Welcome, O
Wazir and sire sans peer!  Verily, thine acts are those of a
counsellor right dear, and judgement and foreseeing clear are in
the hands of the Subtle of Lere." Then bade he the Chamberlain
forthwith go out and cause the tables to be spread and order all
the troops thereto.  So they came and ate and drank.  Moreover
the Sultan commanded his Wazir Dandan call a ten days' halt of
the army, that he might be private with him and learn from him
how and wherefore his father had been slain.  The Wazir obeyed
the commands of the Sultan with submission and wished him
eternity of glory and said, "This needs must be!" He then
repaired to the heart of the encampment and ordered the host to
halt ten days.  They did as he bade them and, moreover, he gave
them leave to divert themselves and ordered that none of the
lords in waiting should attend upon the King for service during
the space of three days.  Then the Wazir went to the Sultan and
reported all to him, and Zau al-Makan waited until nightfall,
when he went in to his sister Nuzhat al-Zaman and asked her,
"Dost thou know the cause of my father's murder or not?" "I have
no knowledge of the cause," she answered, and drew a silken
curtain before herself, whilst Zau al-Makan seated himself
without the curtain and commanded the Wazir to the presence and,
when he came, said to him, "I desire thou relate to me in detail
the cause of the killing of my sire, King Omar bin al-Nu'uman!"
"Know then, O King," replied Dandan, "that King Omar bin al-
Nu'uman, when he returned to Baghdad from his chasing and hunting
and entered the city, enquired for thee and thy sister, but could
not find you and knew that you twain had gone on the Pilgrimage;
whereat he was greatly grieved and much angered, and his breast
was straitened and he abode thus half a year, seeking news of you
from all who came and went but none could give him any tidings. 
Now while we were in attendance upon him one day, after a whole
year had sped since ye were lost to his sight, lo!  there came to
us an ancient dame with signs of being a devotee, accompanied by
five damsels, high bosomed virgins like moons, endowed with such
beauty and loveliness as tongue faileth to describe; and, to
crown their perfections of comeliness, they could read the Koran
and were versed in various kinds of learning and in the histories
of bygone peoples.  Then that old woman sought audience of the
King, and he bade admit her; whereupon she entered the presence
and kissed the ground between his hands.  I was then sitting by
his side and he, seeing in her the signs of asceticism and
devoutness, made her draw near and take seat hard by him.  And
when she had sat down she addressed him and said, 'Know, O King,
that with me are five damsels, whose like no King among the Kings
possesseth; for they are endowed with wit and beauty and
loveliness and perfection.  They read the Koran--and the
Traditions and are skilled in all manner of learning and in the
history of bygone races.  They stand here between thy hands to do
thee service, O King of the Age, and it is by trial that folk are
prized or despised.  'Thy father, who hath found mercy; [FN#328]
looked at the damsels and their favour pleased him; so he said to
them, Let each and every of you make me hear something of what
she knoweth anent the history of the folk of yore and of peoples
long gone before!'--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

              When it was the Seventy-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Dandan said unto King Zau al-Makan, "Thy father, who hath found
mercy, glanced at the damsels and their favour pleased him and he
said to them, 'Let each and every of you make me hear something
of what she knoweth anent the history of the folk of yore and of
peoples long gone before!' Thereupon one of them came forward
and, kissing the ground before him, spake as follows [FN#329]
'Know, O King, that it behoveth one of good breeding to eschew
impertinence and adorn himself with excellencies, and observe the
Divine injunctions and avoid mortal sins; and to this he should
apply himself with the assiduity of one who, if he stray
therefrom, falleth into perdition; for the foundation of good
breeding is virtuous behaviour.  And know that the chief cause
and reason of man's existence is the endeavour after life
everlasting, and the right way thereto is the service of Allah. 
Wherefore it behoveth thee to deal beneficently with the people:
and swerve not from this canon, for the mightier men are in
dignity, the more their need of prudence and foresight; and
indeed Monarchs need this more than the many, for the general
cast themselves into affairs, without taking thought to the issue
thereof.  Be thou prodigal of thy life and thy good in the way of
Allah, and know that, if an enemy dispute with thee, thou mayst
dispute with him and refute him with proofs and be proof against
him; but as for thy friend, there is none can judge between thee
and him save righteousness and fair dealing.  Choose, therefore,
thy friend for thyself, after thou hast proved him.  If he be of
the brotherhood of futurity, [FN#330] let him be zealous in
observing the externals of the Holy Law and versed in its inner
meaning, as far as may be; and if he be of the brotherhood of the
world, let him be free born, sincere, neither a fool nor a
perverse, for the fool man is such that even his parents might
well flee from him, and a liar cannot be a true friend.  Indeed
the word, Siddik [FN#331] ('friend') deriveth from Sidk ('truth')
that welleth up from the bottom of the heart; and how can this be
the case, when falsehood is manifest upon the tongue?  And know,
that the observance of the Law profiteth him who practiseth it:
so love thy brother, if he be of this quality and do not cast him
off, even if thou see in him that which irketh thee, for a friend
is not I like a wife, whom one can divorce and re-marry: nay, his
heart is like glass: once broken, it may not be mended.  And
Allah bless him who saith,

'Ware how thou hurtest man with hurt of heart; * 'Tis hard to win
     thee back the heart offended:
For hearts indeed, whence love is alien made, * Like broken glass
     may nevermore be mended.'

The maiden continued and concluded with pointing out to us what
sages say, 'The best of brethren is he who is the most constant
in good counsel; the best of action is that which is fairest in
its consequence, and the best of praise is not that which is in
the mouths of men.  It is also said, 'It behoveth not the servant
to neglect thanking Allah especially for two favours, health and
reason.' Again it is said, 'Whoso honoureth himself, his lust is
a light matter to him, and he who maketh much of his small
troubles, Allah afflicteth him with the greater; he who obeyeth
his own inclination neglecteth his duties and he who listeneth to
the slanderer loseth the true friend.  He who thinketh well of
thee, do thou fulfill his thought of thee.  He who exceedeth in
contention sinneth, and he who against upright standeth not on
ward, is not safe from the sword.  Now will I tell thee somewhat
of the duties of Kazis and judges.  Know, O King, that no
judgement serveth the cause of justice save it be given after
proof positive, and it behoveth the judge to treat all people on
the same level, to the intent that the great may not hunger for
oppression nor the small despair of justice.  Furthermore he
should extract proof from the complainant and impose an oath upon
the defendant; and mediation is admissible between Moslems,
except it be a compromise sanctioning the unlawful or forbidding
the lawful. [FN#332] If thou shalt have done aught during the day,
of which thy reason is doubtful but thy good intention is proved,
thou (O Kazi) shouldst revert to the right, for to do justice is
a religious obligation and to return to that which is right is
better than persistence in wrong.  Then (O judge) thou shouldest
study precedents and the law of the case and do equal justice
between the suitors, withal fixing thine eyes upon the truth and
committing thine affair to Allah (be He extolled and exalted!). 
And require thou proof of the complainant, and if he adduce
evidence let him have due benefit of it; and if not, put the
defendant to his oath; for this is the ordinance of Allah. 
Receive thou the testimony of competent Moslem witnesses, one
against other, for Almighty Allah hath commanded judges to judge
by externals, He Himself taking charge of the inner and secret
things.  It behoveth the judge also to avoid giving judge meet,
whilst suffering from stress of pain or hunger, [FN#333] and that
in his decisions between folk he seek the face of Allah Almighty
for he whose intent is pure and who is at peace with himself,
Allah shall guarantee him against what is between him and the
people.' Quoth al-Zuhri, [FN#334] 'There are three things for
which, if they be found in a Kazi, he should be deposed; namely,
if he honour the base, if he love praise and if he fear
dismissal.  And Omar bin Abd al-Aziz once deposed a Kazi, who
asked him, 'Why hast thou dismissed me?  It hath reached me,'
answered Omar, 'that thy converse is greater than thy condition.'
It is said also that Iskandar [FN#335] said to his Kazi, 'I have
invested thee with this function and committed to thee in it my
soul and mine honour and my manliness; so do thou guard it with
thy sense and thine understanding.' To his Cook he said, 'Thou
art the Sultan of my body; so look thou tender it as thine own
self.' To his Secretary he said, 'Thou art the controller of my
wit: so do thou watch over me in what thou writest for me and
from me.'" Thereupon the first damsel backed out from the
presence and a second damsel came forward.--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

                When it was the Eightieth Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Wazir Dandan said to Zau al-Makan, "Thereupon the first damsel
backed out from the presence and a second damsel came forward
and, kissing the ground seven times before the King thy father,
spake as follows, 'The sage Lukman [FN#336] said to his son,
'There be three who are known only in three several cases; the
merciful man is unknown save in time of wrath, the brave only in
battle, and thy friend in time of need.' It is said that the
oppressor shall be depress though by people praised, and that the
oppress is at rest though by people blamed.  Quoth Allah
Almighty, [FN#337] 'Assuredly deem not that those who rejoice in
what they have done, and who love to be praised for what they
have not done, shall escape reckoning of punishment: indeed there
is reserved for them a grievous penalty.' And he said [FN#338] (on
whom be salvation and salutation!), 'Works are according to
intention and to each man is attributed that which he intendeth.'
He said also, 'In the body is a part which being sound the rest
is sound, and which being unsound the whole is unsound.' And this
is the heart.  Now this heart is the most marvellous of what is
in man, since it is that which ordereth his whole affair: If
covetise stir in it, desire destroyeth him, and if affliction
master it, anguish slayeth him; if anger rage in it, danger is
hard upon him; if it be blest with contentment, he is safe from
discontent; if fear surprise it, he is full of mourning; and if
calamity overtake it, affliction betideth him.  If a man gain the
use of wealth, peradventure he is diverted thereby from the
remembrance of his Lord; if poverty choke him his heart is
distracted by woe, or if disquietude waste his heart, weakness
causeth him to fall.  Thus, in any case, nothing profiteth him
but that he be mindful of Allah and occupy himself with gaining
his livelihood in this world and securing his place in the next. 
It was asked of a certain sage, 'Who is the most ill conditioned
of men?'; and he answered, 'The man whose lusts master his
manhood and whose mind soareth over high, so that his knowledge
dispreadeth and his excuse diminisheth; and how excellently saith
the poet,

Freest am I of all mankind fro' meddling wight * Who, seeing
     others err, self error ne'er can sight:
Riches and talents are but loans to creature lent, * Each wears
     the cloak of that he bears in breast and sprite:
If by mistaken door attempt on aught thou make, * Thou shalt go
     wrong and if the door be right, go right!'

Continued the maiden, 'As for anecdotes of devotees, quoth Hisham
bin Bashar, 'I asked Omar bin Ubayd, What is true piety?'; and he
answered, 'The Apostle of Allah (to whom be salutation and
salvation!) hath explained it when he sayeth, The pious is he who
forgetteth not the grave nor calamity and who preferreth that
which endureth to that which passeth away; who counteth not the
morrow as of his days but reckoneth himself among the dead.' And
it is related that Abu Zarr [FN#339] used to say, Want is dearer
to me than wealth, and unheal is dearer to me than health.' Quoth
one of the listeners, 'May Allah have mercy on Abu Zarr!'.  For
my part, I say, 'Whoso putteth his trust in the goodness of the
election of Almighty Allah should be content with that condition
which Allah hath chosen for him.' Quoth one of the Companions of
the Prophet, 'Ibn Abi Aufa [FN#340] once prayed with us the dawn
prayer.  When he had done, he recited, 'O Thou
Enwrapped!' [FN#341] till he came to where Allah saith, 'When
there shall be a trumping on the trumpet,' and fell down dead. 
It is said that Sabit al-Banani wept till he well nigh lost his
eyes.  They brought him a man to medicine him who said to him, 'I
will cure thee, provided thou obey my bidding' Asked Sabit, 'In
what matter?' Quoth the leach, 'In that thou leave weeping!'
'What is the worth of mine eyes?', rejoined Sabit, 'if they do
not weep?' Quoth a man to Mohammed bin Abdillah, 'Exhort thou
me!'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

              When it was the Eighty-first Night,

She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Wazir Dandan said to Zau al-Makan, "Thus spake the second hand
maid to the King who hath found mercy, Omar bin al-Nu'uman. 
'Quoth a man to Mohammed bin Abdillah, Exhort thou me!' 'I exhort
thee,' replied he, 'to be a self ruler, an abstainer in this
world, and in the next a greedy slave.' 'How so?' asked the other
and Mohammed answered, 'The abstinent man in this world
conquereth both the world that is and the world to come.' And
quoth Ghaus bin Abdillah, 'There were two brothers among the sons
of Israel, one of whom said to the other, 'What be the most
perilous [FN#342] thing thou hast done?' Replied the brother, 'I
once came upon a nest of young birds; so I took out one and threw
it back into the nest; but among the chickens were some which
drew apart from it.  This is the most perilous thing I ever did;
now what be the most perilous thing thou hast ever done?' He
rejoined, 'When I arise for prayer I am fearful that it is only
for the sake of the reward.' Now their father heard these words
and exclaimed, 'O Allah, an say they sooth take them to Thyself!'
It was declared by one of the wise men, 'Verily, these were of
the most virtuous of children.' Quoth Sa'id bin Jubayr, [FN#343]
'I was once in company with Fuzalah bin 'Ubaydand said to him,
'Exhort thou me!, Replied he, 'Bear in mind these two
necessaries, Shun syntheism [FN#344] and harm not any of Allah's
creatures.' And he repeated these two couplets,

'Be as thou wilt, for Allah still is bounteous Lord, * And care
     dispeller dread not therefore bane and ban
To two things only never draw thee nigh, nor give * Partner to
     Allah trouble to thy brother man.'

And how well saith the poet,

'An thou of pious works a store neglect * And after death meet
     one who did collect,
Thou shalt repent thou diddest not as he, * Nor madest ready as
     he did elect.'

Then the third damsel came forward, after the second had with
drawn, and said, 'Of a truth, the chapter of piety is exceeding
wide; but I will mention what occurreth to me thereof, concerning
the pious of old.  Quoth a certain holy man, 'I congratulate
myself in death, though I am not assured of rest therein, save
that I know death interveneth between a man and his works; so I
hope for the doubling of good works and the docking off of ill
works.' And Ita'a al Salami, when he had made an end of an
exhortation, was wont to tremble and grieve and weep sore; and as
they asked him why he did this he answered, 'I desire to enter
upon a grave matter, and it is the standing up before Almighty
Allah to do in accordance with my exhortation.' In similar guise
Zayn al-Abidin, [FN#345] son of Al-Husayn, was wont to tremble
when he rose to pray.  Being asked the cause of this, he replied,
'Know ye not before whom I stand and whom I address?' It is said
that there lived near Sufyan al-Thauri [FN#346] a blind man who,
when the month of Ramazan came, went out with the folk to
pray, [FN#347] but remained silent and hung back.  Said Sufyan,
'On the Day of Resurrection he shall come with the people of the
Koran and they will be distinguished by increase of honour from
their fellows.' Quoth Sufyan, 'Were the soul established in the
heart as befitteth, it would fly away for joy and pining for
Paradise, and for grief and fear of hell-fire.' It is related
also of Sufyan Al-Thauri that he said, 'To look upon the face of
a tyrant is a sin.' Then the third damsel retired and came for
ward the fourth, who said, 'Here am I to treat of sundry
traditions of pious men which suggest themselves to me.  It is
related that Bishr Barefoot [FN#348] said, 'I once heard Khalid
say, 'Beware of secret polytheism.' I asked, 'What may secret
polytheism be?'; and he answered, 'When one of you in praying
prolong his inclinations and prostrations till a cause of
impurity [FN#349] come upon him.' And one of the sages said,
'Doing works of weal expiateth what is ill.' Quoth
Ibrahim, [FN#350] 'I supplicated Bishr Barefoot to acquaint me
with some theological mysteries; but he said, 'O my son, this
knowledge it behoveth us not to teach to every one; of every
hundred five, even as the legal alms upon money.' Said Ibrahim,
'I thought his reply excellent and approved of it and while I was
praying behold, Bishr was also praying: so I stood behind
him [FN#351] making the prayer bow till the Mu'ezzin called his
call.  Then rose a man of tattered appearance and said, O folk,
beware of a truth which bringeth unweal, for there is no harm in
a lie bringing weal, [FN#352] and in time of need no choice we
heed: speech booteth not in the absence of good qualities even as
silence hurteth not in the presence of good.  Presently I saw
Bishr drop a danik, [FN#353] so I picked it up and exchanged it
for a dirham which I gave him.  Quoth he, 'I will not take it.'
Quoth I, 'It is perfectly lawful change'; but he rejoined 'I
cannot take in exchange the riches of the present world for those
of the future world.' It is related also that Bishr Barefoot's
sister once went to Ahmad bin Hanbal" [FN#354]--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

              When it was the Eighty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Dandan continued to bespeak Zau al-Makan on this wise, "And quoth
the maiden to thy father, 'Bishr Barefoot's sister once went to
Ahmad bin Hanbal and said to him, 'O Imam of the Faith, we are a
family that spin thread by night and work for our living by day;
and oftentimes the cressets of the watch of Baghdad pass by and
we on the roof spinning by their light.  Is this forbidden to
us?' Asked Ahmad:'Who are thou?' 'I am the sister of Bishr
Barefoot,' answered she.  Rejoined the Iman, 'O household of
Bishr, I shall never cease to drink full draughts of piety from
your hearts.' Quoth one of the sages, 'When Allah willeth well to
His servant He openeth upon him the gate of action.' Malik bin
Dinar, [FN#355] when he passed through the bazar and saw aught he
desired, was wont to say, 'O soul, take patience, for I will not
accord to thee what thou desirest.' He said also (Allah accept
him!), 'The salvation of the soul lies in resistance to it and
its damnation in submission to it.' Quoth Mansur bin
Ammar, [FN#356] 'I made a pilgrimage and was faring Meccahwards by
way of Cufa, and the night was overcast, when I heard a voice
crying out from the deeps of the darkness saying, 'O Allah, I
swear by Thy Greatness and Thy Glory, I meant not through my
disobedience to transgress against Thee; for indeed I am not
ignorant of Thee; but my fault is one Thou didst foreordain to me
from eternity without beginning; [FN#357] so do Thou pardon my
transgression, for indeed I disobeyed Thee of my ignorance!' When
he had made an end of his prayer he recited aloud the verse, 'O
true believers, save your souls and those of your families from
the fire whose fuel is men and stones.' [FN#358] Then I heard a
fall, but not knowing what it was I passed on.  When the morning
morrowed, as we went our way, behold, we fell in with a funeral
train, followed by an old woman whose strength had left her.  I
asked her of the dead, and she answered, 'This is the funeral of
a man who passed by us yesterday whilst my son was standing at
prayer and after his prayers he recited a verse from the Book of
Allah Almighty when the man's gall bladder burst and he fell
dead.' Therewith the fourth damsel retired and the fifth came
forward and said, 'I here will also repeat what occurreth to me
regarding the acts of devotees in olden time.  Maslamah bin Dinar
used to say, 'By making sound the secret thoughts, sins great and
small are covered'; and, 'when the servant of Allah is resolved
to leave sinning, victory cometh to him.' Also quoth he, 'Every
worldly good which doth not draw one nearer to Allah is a
calamity, for a little of this world distracteth from a mickle of
the world to come and a mickle of the present maketh thee forget
the whole of the future.' It was asked of Abu Hazim, [FN#359] 'Who
is the most prosperous of men?'; and he answered, 'Whoso spendeth
his life in submission to Allah.' The other enquired, 'And who is
the most foolish of mankind?' 'Whoso selleth his future for the
worldly goods of others,' replied Abu Hazim.  It is reported of
Moses [FN#360] (on whom be peace!) that when he came to the waters
of Midian he exclaimed, 'O Lord, verily I stand in need of the
good which thou shalt send down to me.' [FN#361] And he asked of
his Lord and not of his folk.  There came two damsels and he drew
water for them both and allowed not the shepherds to draw first. 
When the twain returned, they informed their father Shu'ayb (on
whom be peace!) who said, 'Haply, he is hungry,' adding to one of
them, 'Go back to him and bid him hither.' Now when she came to
Moses, she veiled her face and said, 'My father biddeth thee to
him that he may pay thee thy wage for having drawn water for us.'
Moses was averse to this and was not willing to follow her.  Now
she was a woman large in the back parts, and the wind blowing
upon her garment [FN#362] covered the hinder cheeks to Moses;
which when Moses saw, he lowered his eyes and said to her, 'Get
thee behind while I walk in front.' So she followed him till he
entered the house of Shu'ayb where supper was ready."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

              When it was the Eighty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Dandan continued to Zau al-Makan, "Now, quoth the fifth damsel to
thy sire, 'When Moses (on whom be peace!) entered the home of
Shu'ayb where supper was ready, Shu'ayb said to him, 'O Moses, I
desire to pay thee thy wage for having drawn water for these
two.' But Moses answered, 'I am of a household which selleth
nothing of the fashion of the next world [FN#363] for what is on
earth of gold and silver.' Then quoth Shu'ayb, 'O youth! 
nevertheless thou art my guest, and it is my wont and that of my
forbears to honour the guest by setting food before him.' So
Moses sat down and ate.  Then Shu'ayb hired Moses for eight
pilgrimages, that is to say, eight years, and made his wage
marriage with one of his two daughters, and Moses' service to him
was to stand for her dowry.  As saith the Holy Writ of him,
'Verily I will give thee one of these my two daughters in
marriage, on condition that thou serve me for hire eight
pilgrimages: and if thou fulfil ten years, it is in thine own
breast; for I seek not to impose a hardship on thee.' [FN#364] A
certain man once said to one of his friends whom he had not met
for many days, 'Thou hast made me desolate, for that I have not
seen thee this long while.' Quoth the other, 'I have been
distracted from thee by Ibn Shihab: dost thou know him?' Quoth
his friend, 'Yes, he hath been my neighbour these thirty years,
but I have never spoken to him.' He replied, 'Verily thou
forgettest Allah in forgetting--thy neighbour!  If thou lovedst
Allah thou wouldst love thy neighbour.  Knowest thou not that a
neighbour hath a claim upon his neighbour, [FN#365] even as the
right of kith and kin?' Said Huzayfah, 'We entered Meccah with
Ibrahim bin Adham, and Shakik al-Balkhi was also making a
pilgrimage that year.  Now we met whilst circumambulating the
Ka'abah and Ibrahim said to Shakik, 'What is your fashion in your
country?' Replied Shakik, 'When we are blest with our daily bread
we eat, and when we hunger we take patience.' 'This wise,' said
Ibrahim, 'do the dogs of Balkh; but we, when blest with plenty,
do honour to Allah and when an hungered we thank Him.' And Shakik
seated himself before Ibrahim and said to him, 'Thou art my
master.' Also said Mohammed bin Imran, 'A man once asked of Hatim
the Deaf [FN#366] 'What maketh thee to trust in Allah?' 'Two
things,' answered he, 'I know that none save myself shall eat my
daily bread, so my heart is at rest as to that; and I know that I
was not created without the knowledge of Allah, and am abashed
before Him.' Then the fifth damsel retired and the ancient dame
came forward and, kissing the ground before thy father nine
times, said, 'Thou hast heard, O King, what these all have spoken
on the subject of piety; and I will follow their example in
relating what hath reached me of the famous men of past times. 
It is said that the Imam al-Shafi'i departed the night into three
portions, the first for study, the second for sleep and the third
for prayer.  The Imam Abu Hanifah [FN#367] was wont also to pass
half the night in prayer.  One

day a man pointed him out to another, as he walked by and
remarked, 'Yonder man watcheth the whole night.' When he heard
this Abu Hanifah said, 'I was abashed before Allah to hear myself
praised for what was not in me'; so after this he used to watch
the whole night.  And one of the Sages hath said,

'Who seeketh for pearl in the Deep dives deep; * Who on high
     would hie robs his night of sleep.'

Al-Rabi a relates that Al-Shafi'i used to recite the whole Koran
seventy times during the month of Ramazan, and that in his daily
prayers.  Quoth Al-Shafi'i (Allah accept him!), 'During ten years
I never ate my fill of barley bread, for fullness hardeneth the
heart and deadeneth the wit and induceth sleep and enfeebleth one
from standing up to pray.' [FN#368] It is reported of Abdullah bin
Mohammed al-Sakra that he said, 'I was once talking with Omar and
he observed to me, 'Never saw I a more God fearing or eloquent
man than Mohammed bin Idris al-Shafi'i.' It so happened I went
out one day with Al-Haris bin Labib al-Saffar, who was a disciple
of Al-Muzani [FN#369] and had a fine voice and he read the saying
of the Almighty, 'This shall be a day whereon they shall not
speak to any purpose, nor shall they be permitted to excuse
themselves.' [FN#370] I saw Al-Shafi'i's colour change; his skin
shuddered with horripilation, he was violently moved and he fell
down in a fainting fit When he revived he said, 'I take refuge
with Allah from the stead of the liars and the lot of the
negligent!  O Allah, before whom the hearts of the wise abase
themselves, O Allah, of Thy bene ficence accord to me the
remission of my sins, adorn me with the curtain of Thy protection
and pardon me my shortcomings, by the magnanimity of Thy Being!'
Then I rose and went away.  Quoth one of the pious, 'When I
entered Baghdad, Al-Shafi'i was there.  So I sat down on the
river bank to make the ablution before prayer; and behold, there
passed me one who said, 'O youth, make thy Wuzu-ablution well and
Allah will make it well for thee in this world and in the next.'
I turned and lo!  there was a man behind whom came a company of
people.  So I hastened to finish my ablution and followed him. 
Presently, he turned and asked me, 'Say, dost thou want aught?'
'Yes,' answered I, 'I desire that thou teach me somewhat of that
which Allah Almighty hath taught thee.' He said, 'Know then that
whoso believeth in Allah shall be saved, and whoso jealously
loveth his faith shall be delivered from destruction, and whoso
practiseth abstinence in this world, his eyes shall be solaced on
the morrow of death.  Shall I tell thee any more?' I replied,
'Assuredly;' and he continued, 'Be thou of the world that is,
heedless; and of the world to come, greediest.  Be truthful in
all thy dealings, and thou shalt be saved with the
Salvationists.' Then he went on and I asked about him and was
told that he was the Imam Al-Shafi'i.  Al-Shafi'i was wont to
remark, 'I love to see folk profit by this learning of mine, on
condition that nothing of it be attributed to me."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

              When it was the Eighty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Dandan continued to Zau al-Makan, "The old woman bespake thy
sire, saying, 'The Imam Al-Shafi'i was wont to remark, I love to
see folk profit by this learning of mine on condition that
nothing of it be attributed to me.' He also said, 'I never
disputed with any one, but I would that Almighty Allah should
give him the knowledge of the Truth and aid him to dispread it:
nor did I ever dispute with anyone at all but for the showing
forth of the Truth, and I reck not whether Allah manifest it by
my tongue or by His.' He said also (whom Allah accept!), 'If thou
fear to grow conceited of thy lore, then bethink thee Whose grace
thou seekest and for what good thou yearnest and what punishment
thou dreadest.' It was told to Abu Hanifah that the Commander of
the Faithful, Abu Ja'afar al-Mansur, had appointed him Kazi and
ordered him a salary of ten thousand dirhams; but he would not
accept of this; and, when the day came on which the money was to
be paid him, he prayed the dawn prayer, then covered his head
with his robe--and spoke not.  When the Caliph's messenger came
with the money, he went in to the Imam and accosted him, but he
would not speak to him.  So the messenger said, 'Verily this
money is lawfully thine.' 'I know that it is lawfully mine,'
replied he: 'but I abhor that the love of tyrants get a hold upon
my heart.' [FN#371]  Asked the other, 'If thou go in to them canst
thou not guard thyself from loving them?' Answered Abu Hanifah,
'Can I look to enter the sea without my clothes being wet?'
Another of Al-Shafi'i's sayings (Allah accept him!) is,

'Oh soul of me, an thou accept my rede, * Thou shalt be wealthy
     and of grace entire:
Cast off ambitious hopes and vain desires, * How many a death was
     done by vain desire!'

Among the sayings of Sufyan al-Thauri, with which he admonished
Ali bin al-Hasan al-Salami was, 'Be thou a man of truth and 'ware
lies and treachery and hypocrisy and pride.  Be not indebted save
to Him who is merciful to His debtors; and let thine associate be
one who shall dissociate thee from the world.  Be ever mindful of
death and be constant in craving pardon of Allah and in
beseeching of Allah peace for what remaineth of thy life. 
Counsel every True Believer, when he asketh thee concerning the
things of his faith; and beware of betraying a Believer, for
whoso betrayeth a Believer, betrayeth Allah and His Apostle. 
Avoid dissensions and litigation; and leave that which causeth
doubt in thee for things which breed no doubt: [FN#372] so shalt
thou be at peace.  Enjoin beneficence and forbid malevolence: so
shalt thou be loved of Allah.  Adorn thine inner man and Allah
shall adorn thine outer man.  Accept the excuse of him who
excuseth self to thee and hate not any one of the Moslems.  Draw
near unto those who withdraw from thee and excuse those that
misuse thee: so shalt thou be the friend of the Prophets.  Let
thine affairs, both public and private, be in Allah's charge, and
fear Him with the fear of one who knoweth he is dead and who
fareth towards Resurrection and Judgement stead between the hands
of the Lord of Dread; and remember that to one of two houses thou
art sped, either for Heavens eterne or to the Hell fires that
burn.' Thereupon the old woman sat down beside the damsels.  Now
when thy father, who hath found mercy, heard their discourse, he
knew that they were the most accomplished of the people of their
time; and, seeing their beauty and loveliness and the extent of
their wisdom and lore, he showed them all favour.  Moreover, he
turned to the ancient dame and treated her with honour, and set
apart for her and her damsels the palace which had lodged
Princess Abrizah, daughter of the King of Greece, to which he
bade carry all the luxuries they needed.  They abode with him ten
days and the old woman abode with them; and, whenever the King
visited them, he found her absorbed in prayer, watching by night
and fasting by day; whereby love of her took hold upon his heart
and he said to me, 'O Wazir, verily this old woman is of the
pious, and awe of her is strong in my heart.' Now on the eleventh
day, the King visited her, that he might pay her the price of the
damsels; but she said to him, 'O King, know that the price of
these maidens surpasseth the competence of men; indeed I seek not
for them either gold or silver or jewels, be it little or much.'
Now when thy father heard these words he wondered and asked her,
'O my lady and what is their price?'; whereto she answered, 'I
will not sill them to thee save on condition that thou fast,
watching by night a whole month, and abstaining by day, all for
the love of Allah Almighty; and, if thou do this, they are thy
property to use in thy palace as thou please.' So the King
wondered at the perfection of her rectitude and piety and
abnegation; she was magnified in his eyes and he said, 'Allah
make this pious woman to profit us!' Then he agreed with her to
fast for a month as she had stipulated, and she said to him, 'I
will help thee with the prayers I pray for thee and now bring me
a gugglet of water.' They brought one and she took it and recited
over it and muttered spells, and sat for an hour speaking in
speech no one understood or knew aught thereof.  Lastly she
covered it with a cloth and, sealing it with her signet ring,
gave it to thy sire, saying, 'When thou hast fasted the first ten
days, break thy fast on the eleventh night with what is in this
gugglet, for it will root out the love of the world from thy
heart and fill it with light and faith.  As for me, tomorrow I
will go forth to my brethren, the Invisible [FN#373] Controuls,
for I yearn after them, and I will return to thee when the first
ten days are past.  Thy father took the gugglet and arose and set
it apart in a closet of his palace, then locked the door and put
the key in his pocket.  Next day the King fasted and the old
woman went her ways."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

              When it was the Eighty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Dandan thus continued to Zau al-Makan, "Now when came the day for
the Sultan's fast, the old woman went her ways.  And after he had
accomplished the ten days thereof, on the eleventh he opened the
gugglet and drank what was therein and found it cordial to his
stomach.  Within the second ten days of the month the old woman
returned, bringing sweetmeats wrapped in a green leaf, like no
leaf of known tree.  She went in to thy sire and saluted him;
and, when he saw her, he rose to her saying, 'Welcome, O pious
lady!' 'O King,' quoth she, 'the Invisible Controuls salute thee,
for I told them of thee, and they rejoiced in thee and have sent
thee their Halwa, [FN#374] which is of the sweetmeats of the other
world.  Do thou break thy fast on it at the end of the day.' The
King rejoiced at this with great joy, and exclaimed, 'Praised be
Allah, who hath given me brethren of the Invisible World!'
Thereupon he thanked the ancient dame and kissed her hands; and
he honoured her and the damsels with exceeding honour.  She went
forth for the twenty days of thy father's fast at the end of
which time she came to him and said, 'Know, O King, that I told
the Invisible Controuls of the love which is between me and thee,
and informed them how I had left the maidens with thee, and they
were glad that the damsels should belong to a King like thee; for
they were wont, when they saw them, to be strenuous in offering
on their behalf prayers and petitions ever granted.  So I would
fain carry them to the Invisible Controuls that they may benefit
by the breath of their favour, and peradventure, they shall not
return to thee without some treasure of the treasures of the
earth, that thou, after completing thy fast, mayst occupy thyself
with their raiment and help thyself by the money they shall bring
thee, to the extent of thy desires.' When thy sire heard her
words, he thanked her for them and said, 'Except that I fear to
cross thee, I would not accept the treasure or aught else; but
when wilt thou set out with them?' Replied she, 'On the seven and
twentieth night; and I will bring them back to thee at the head
of the month, by which time thou wilt have accomplished thy fast
and they will have had their courses and be free from impurity;
and they shall become thine and be at thy disposal.  By Allah,
each damsel of them is worth many times thy kingdom!' He said, 'I
know it, O pious lady!' Then quoth the old woman, 'There is no
help but that thou send with them someone in thy palace who is
dear to thee, that she may find solace and seek a blessing of the
Invisible Controuls.' Quoth he, 'I have a Greek slave called
Sophia, by whom I have been blessed with two children, a girl and
a boy; but they were lost; years ago.  Take her with thee that
she may get the blessing'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

              When it was the Eighty-sixth Night,

 She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Dandan continued to Zau al-Makan, "Quoth thy sire to the ancient
woman when she demanded the handmaids of him, 'I have a Greek
slave called Sophia, by whom I have been blest with two children,
a girl and a boy, but they were lost years ago; so take her with
thee, haply she may get the benediction and, belike, the
Invisible Controuls will sue Allah for her that her two children
may be restored to her.' 'Thou hast said well,' replied she; 'for
that indeed was her grievousest want.' Thy sire gave not over
finishing his fast till the old woman said to him, 'O my son, I
am going to the Invisible Controuls; so bring me Sophia.'
Accordingly, he summoned her and she came forthright, and he
delivered her to the old woman who mixed her up with the other
damsels.  Then she went in to her chamber and bringing out a
sealed cup, presented it to the Sultan saying, 'On the thirtieth
day, do thou repair to the Hammam and when thou comest out, enter
one of the closets in thy palace and drink what is in this cup. 
Then sleep, and thou shalt attain what thou seekest, and peace be
with thee'!  Thereat the King was glad and thanked her and kissed
her hands.  Quoth she, 'I commend thee to Allah's care;' whereat
quoth he, 'And when shall I see thee again, O pious lady?  In
very sooth I love not to part with thee.' Then she called down
blessings on him and departed with the five damsels and the
Queen; whilst the King fasted after her departure other three
days, till the month ended, when he arose and went to the Hammam
and coming out shut himself up in a closet of his palace,
commanding that none should go in to him.  There, after making
fast the door, he drank what was in the cup and lay down to
sleep; and we sat awaiting him till the end of the day, but he
did not come out and we said, 'Perchance he is tired with the
bath and with watching by night and fasting by day; wherefore he
sleepeth.' So we waited till next day; but still he did not come
forth.  Then we stood at the closet door and cried aloud so haply
he might awake and ask what was the matter.  But nothing came of
that; so at last we lifted up the door; [FN#375] and, going in,
found him dead, with his flesh torn into strips and bits and his
bones broken. [FN#376] When we saw him in this condition it was
grievous to us, and we took up the cup and found within its cover
a piece of paper whereon was inscribed, 'Whoso doeth evil leaveth
no regrets, and this be the reward of him who playeth traitor
with the daughters of Kings and who debaucheth them; and we make
known to all who fall upon this scroll that Sharrkan, when he
came to our country, seduced our Queen Abrizah; nor did that
suffice him but he must needs take her from us and bring her to
you.  Then he [FN#377] sent her away in company of a black slave
who slew her, and we found her lying dead on the desert sward and
thrown out to wild beasts.  This be no kingly deed, and he who
did this is requited with naught but what he merited.  So do ye
suspect none of having killed him, for no one slew him but the
cunning witch, whose name is Zat al-Dawahi.  And behold, I have
taken the King's wife, Sophia, and have carried her to her
father, Afridun King of Constantinople.  Moreover, there is no
help for it but that we wage war upon you and kill you and take
your country from you, and ye shall be cut off even to the last
man, nor shall a living soul be spared by Death nor one who
bloweth fire with his breath, save he who Cross and Belt [FN#378]
worshippeth.' When we read this paper, we knew that the ancient
woman had beguiled us and carried out her plot against us:
whereupon we cried aloud and buffeted our faces and wept sore
when weeping availed us naught.  And the troops fell out as to
whom they should make Sultan; some would have thee, and others
would have thy brother Sharrkan; and we ceased not to dispute
about this for the space of a month, at the end of which certain
of us drew together and agreed to repair to thy brother Sharrkan:
so we set out and journeyed on till we fell in with thee.  And
such is the manner of the death of Sultan Omar bin al-Nu'uman!"
Now when the Wazir Dandan had made an end of his story, Zau al-
Makan and his sister, Nuzhat al-Zaman wept; and the Chamberlain,
who wept also, said to Zau al-Makan, "O King, weeping will avail
thee naught; nor shall aught profit thee but that thou harden thy
heart and strengthen thy stress and establish thy sovranty; for
verily whoso leaveth the like of thee is not dead." Thereupon Zau
al-Makan gave over his weeping and caused his throne to be set up
without the pavilion, and then commanded the army to pass in
review order before him.  And the Chamberlain sat by his side and
all the armour-bearers [FN#379] behind him, whilst the Wazir
Dandan and the rest of the Emirs and Grandees stood each in his
individual stead.  Then quoth King Zau al-Makan to the Minister
Dandan, "Inform me concerning my sire's treasures;" and he
replied, "I hear and I obey;" and gave him to know of the late
King's hoards and monies, and what was in the treasury of amassed
wealth and jewels, and acquainted him with other precious things. 
So Zau al-Makan opened his hand to the army, and gave a sumptuous
robe of honour to the Wazir Dandan, saying, "Thou continues" in
office.  Whereupon Dandan kissed the ground before him and wished
him long life.  Then he bestowed dresses on the Emirs, after
which he said to the Chamberlain, "Bring out before me the
tribute of Damascus that is with thee." So he was shown the
chests of money and rarities and jewels, when he took them and
parted them all amongst the troops,--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

             When it was the Eighty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Zau al-
Makan ordered the Chamberlain to bring out before him what he had
brought of the tribute of Damascus; and, when he was shown the
chests of money and rarities and jewels, he took them and parted
them all amongst the troops, till nothing was left.  And the
Emirs kissed the ground before him and wished him long life,
saying, "Never saw we a King, who gave the like of these gifts."
Then all went away to their tents and when it was morning he gave
orders for marching.  So they marched for three days, till, on
the fourth day, they drew near to Baghdad.  When they entered the
city, they found it decorated, and Zau al-Makan, the Sultan, went
up to his father's palace and sat down on the throne, whilst the
Emirs of the army and the Wazir Dandan and the Chamberlain of
Damascus stood between his hands.  Then he bade his private
secretary write a writ to his brother Sharrkan, acquainting him
with all that had passed, from first to last, and he concluded,
"As soon as thou hast read this letter, make ready thine affair
and join us with thine army, that we may turn to Holy War upon
the Infidels and take man bote for our father and wipe out the
stain upon our honour." Then he folded the letter and sealed it
with his seal ring and said to the Minister Dandan, "None shall
carry this letter but thou; and it behoveth thee speak my brother
fair and say to him, 'If thou have a mind to thy father's
kingdom, it is thine, and thy brother shall be Viceroy for thee
in Damascus; for to this effect am I instructed by him.'" So the
Wazir went down from before him and made ready for his march. 
Then Zau al-Makan bade set apart a magnificent house for the
Fireman and furnished it with the best of furniture and long is
the tale of that Fireman. [FN#380]  Presently Zau al-Makan went
out chasing and hunting and, as he was returning to Baghdad, one
of the Emirs presented him with blood horses and with beauteous
handmaids whose description the tongue evades.  One of the
damsels pleased him: so he went in unto her and knew her that
night, and she conceived by him forthright.  After a while, the
Wazir Dandan returned from his journey, bringing him news of his
brother Sharrkan and that he was then on his way to him, and
said, "It were fitting thou go forth to meet him." Zau al- Makan
replied, "I hear and I consent;" and riding forth with his
Grandees a day's journey from Baghdad, he pitched his pavilions
there awaiting his brother.  Next morning appeared King Sharrkan
amid the army of Syria, a horseman of might, a lion fierce in
fight, a prow and doughty knight.  As the squadrons drew nigh and
the dust clouds came hard by and the troops rode up with banners
on high, Zau al-Makan and those with him pushed forward to meet
Sharrkan and his men; and when Zau al-Makan saw his brother, he
desired to dismount, but Sharrkan conjured him not to do on this
wise, and himself footed it, and walked a few paces towards
him. [FN#381] As soon as he reached Zau al-Makan, the new Sultan
threw himself upon him, and Sharrkan embraced him and wept with
great weeping and the twain condoled with each other.  Then they
mounted and rode onward, they and their troops, till they reached
Baghdad, where they alighted and went up to the royal palace and
there they passed that night, and when next morning came, Zau al-
Makan went forth and bade summon the troops from all parts, and
proclaimed a Holy War and a Razzia. [FN#382] They then awaited the
coming of the levies from each quarter of the kingdom, and every
one who came they entreated with honour and promised him all
manner of good; till in so doing a full month had sped, and the
fighting men flocked to them in a continuous body.  Then Sharrkan
said to Zau al-Makan, "O my brother, tell me thy history." So he
told him all that had befallen him from first to last, including
the benevolent dealing of the Fireman with him.  Asked Sharrkan,
'Hast thou requited his kindness?"; and he answered, "O my
brother!  I have not rewarded him as yet, but Inshallah!  I will
recompense him whenas I return from this raid"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

              When it was the Eighty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sharrkan
asked his brother Zau al-Makan, "Hast thou requited the Fireman
for his kindness?"; and he answered, "O my brother, I have not
rewarded him as yet, but Inshallah!  I will recompense him whenas
I return from this raid and find time so to do." Therewith
Sharrkan was certified that his sister, Nuzhat al-Zaman, had told
him the whole truth; but he concealed what had passed between
them and offered his salutation to her by her husband the
Chamberlain.  She sent him back her greeting, calling down
blessings on him and enquiring after her daughter Kuzia-Fakan, to
which he replied that the maiden was well and in the best of
health and safety.  Where upon she praised Almighty Allah and
gave him thanks.  Then Sharrkan went to his brother to take
counsel with him for departure; and Zau al-Makan said, "O my
brother, as soon as the army is complete and the Arabs have come
in from all parts, we will march forth." So he bade make ready
the commissariat and prepare munitions of war and went in to his
wife, who was now five months gone with child; and he put under
her astrologers and mathematicians, to whom he appointed stipends
and allowances.  Then he set out three months after the arrival
of the army of Syria, and as soon as the Arabs were come in and
the troops were assembled from all directions; and, as he fared
forth, he was followed by the warriors and the united host.  Now
the name of the General of the Daylam army was Rustam and that of
the General of the army of the Turks [FN#383] Bahram.  And Zau al-
Makan marched in mid host and on his right was his brother
Sharrkan, and on his left the Chamberlain his brother-in-law.  So
the squadrons broke up and pushed forward and the battalions and
companies filed past in battle array, till the whole army was in
motion.  They ceased not to fare on for the space of a month, and
each body dismounted at its own ground and there rested every
week three days (for the host was great); and they advanced in
this order till they came to the country of the Greeks.  Then the
people of the villages and hamlets and the poorer sort took
fright at them and fled to Constantinople.  But when King Afridun
heard the tidings he arose and betook himself to Zat al-Dawahi,
the same who had contrived the stratagem, and had travelled to
Baghdad and had slain King Omar bin Al-Nu'uman; and who after
carrying off her slaves and Queen Sophia, had returned with them
all to her native land.  Now when she had been restored to her
son, the King of Greece, and felt herself safe, she said to King
Hardub, "Cool thine eyes; for I have avenged by blood the shame
of thy daughter Abrizah, and have killed Omar bin al-Nu'uman and
have brought back Sophia.  So now let us go to the King of
Constantinople and carry to him his daughter and acquaint him
with what hath happened, that all of us be on guard and prepare
our forces; and I will fare with thee to King Afridun, Lord of
Constantinople, for I opine that the Moslems will not await our
attack." Said Hardub, "Tarry thou till they draw near our
country, that we may make us ready meantime and assemble our
power." Accordingly they took to levying their forces and
preparing for war, and, when the news of the Moslems' advance
reached them, they were prepared for defence; and Zat al Dawahi
had preceded them.  Now when she and her son arrived at
Constantinople, the King of Kings, Afridun, hearing of the
approach of Hardub, King of the Greeks, came forth to meet him
and asked how it was with him and the cause of his visit.  So
Hardub acquainted him with the cunning doings of his mother, Zat
al-Dawahi, how she had slain the Moslem King and recovered from
him Queen Sophia, and had said, "The Moslems have assembled their
forces and are on their way to attack us, wherefore it behoveth
that we two join hands in single band and meet them." Now King
Afridun rejoiced in the return of his daughter and the killing of
King Omar bin al-Nu'uman; and he sent to all countries seeking
succour and acquainting the folk with the cause of slaying the
Moslem King.  So the Nazarene troops flocked to him and three
months were not past ere the army of the Greeks was complete,
besides which there joined themselves to him Franks from all
their lands, French, Germans [FN#384] and Ragusans, [FN#385] with
men of Zara, [FN#386] Venetians, Genoese, and all the hosts of the
Yellow Faces [FN#387]; and, when the gathering was at its full,
earth was straitened on them by reason of their multitude.  Then
Afridun, the Great King, ordered a march; so they set out and
ceased not to defile through the city for ten days.  They fared
on till they reached the Wady highs Al-Nu'uman, a broad sided
vale hard by the Salt Sea, where they halted three days; and on
the fourth they were about to set out again, when news came that
the army of Al-Islam on them press, and the defenders of the
faith of Mohammed, of Men the Best.  So they halted in it other
three days, and on the eighth they espied a dust cloud which
towered till it walled the whole land; nor was an hour of the day
past ere that dust began to drift and was torn to shreds in the
lift, and pierced through its shades the starry radiance of lance
and the white levee of blades.  Presently there appeared beneath
it the banners Islamitan and the ensigns Mahometan; the horsemen
urged forward, like the letting loose of seas that surged, clad
in mail, as they were mackerel-back clouds which the moon enveil;
whereupon the two hosts clashed, like two torrents on each other
dashed.  Eyes fell upon eyes; and the first to seek combat
singular was the Wazir Dandan, he and the army of Syria,
numbering thirty thousand bridles, and with him were the General
of the Turks, and the General of Daylam, Rustam and Bahram, amid
twenty thousand horse, behind whom came the men from the shores
of the Salt Sea, clad in iron mail, as they were full moons that
past through a night o'ercast.  Then the Nazarene host called out
on Jesus and Mary, and the defiled [FN#388] Cross and they heaped
themselves upon the Wazir Dandan and those with him of the Syrian
host.  Now all this was in pursuance of a stratagem devised by
that ancient woman Zat al-Dawahi; for, before his departure, King
Afridun had gone in to her and asked her, "How shall I do and
what plan shall I pursue?; it is thou hast caused this great
distress to us;" and she had answered, "O great King and mighty
Cohen! [FN#389] I will teach thee a trick would baffle Iblis
himself, though he summon to his assistance all his grisly
hosts."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

              When it was the Eighty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, all this was a
stratagem of the ancient woman, for that the King before his
departure had gone to her and asked, "How shall I do and what
plan shall I pursue?  it is thou hast caused this great distress
to us!" And she had answered, "O great King and mighty Cohen, I
will teach thee a trick would baffle the Devil himself though he
summon to his assistance all his grisly hosts.  It is that thou
send fifty thousand men going down in ships, and sailing over the
sea to the Mountain of Smoke; and there let them land and stir
not till {he standards of Al-Islam come upon thee, when do thou
up and at them.  Then bid the troops from the seaward sally out
upon the Moslems and take them in rear, whilst we confront them
from the landward.  So not one of them shall escape, and our
sorrows shall tease and peace abide with us." Now the counsel of
this ancient woman commended itself to King Afridun, and he
replied, "Right is the recking thou reckest, O Princess of wits
and recourse of Kings and Cohens warring for their blood wit!" So
when the army of Al-Islam came upon them in chat valley, before
they knew of it the flames began to burn up the tents and the
swords in men's bodies to make rents.  Then hurried up the army
of Baghdad and Khorasan who numbered one hundred and twenty
thousand horse, with Zau al-Makan in the front of war.  When the
host of the Infidels that lay by the sea saw them, they sallied
out against them and followed in their tracks; and when Zau al-
Makan espied this he cried out to his men, "Turn back to the
Infidels, O People of the Chosen Apostle, and slay those who deny
and hate the authority of the Compassionating, the
Compassionate!" So they turned and fought with the Christians. 
Then Sharrkan marched up with another corps of the Moslem host,
some hundred thousand men, whilst the Infidels numbered nigh upon
a thousand and six hundred thousand men.  When the Moslems were
united, their hearts were strengthened and they cried out,
saying, "Verily Allah hath pro mised us victory, and to the
Infidels hath assigned defeat." And they clashed together with
sword and spear.  Now Sharrkan tare through rank and row and
raged among the masses of the foe, fighting so fierce a fight as
to make children grey grow; nor did he cease tourneying among the
infidel horde and working havoc among them with the keen edged
sword, shouting "Allaho Akbar!" (Allah is Most Great) till he
drove back the host to the coast.  Then failed the force of the
foe and Allah gave victory to the faith of Al-Islam, and folk
fought folk, drunken without strong drink till they slew of the
Infidels in this affair forty and five thousand, while of the
Moslems but three thousand and five hundred fell.  Moreover, the
Lion of the Faith, King Sharrkan, and his brother, Zau al-Makan,
slept not that night, but occupied themselves with congratulating
their braves and with looking to the wounded and with assuring
the army of victory and salvation and promise of reward in the
world to come.  Thus far concerning the Moslem; but as regards
King Afridun, Lord of Constantinople and Sovran of Roum, and Zat
Al-Dawahi, they assembled the Emirs of the host and said to them,
"Verily, we had worked our will and solaced our hearts, but our
over confidence in our numbers, and that only, defeated us." Then
quoth to them the ancient one, the Lady of Calamities, "In very
sooth nought shall profit you, except ye draw you nigh unto the
Messiah and put your trust in the True Belief, for, by the virtue
of the Messiah, the whole strength of the Moslem host lieth in
that Satan, King Sharrkan." "Tomorrow," said King Afridun, "I
have resolved to draw up in battle array and to send out against
them that redoubtable cavalier, Luka bin Shamlut; for if King
Sharrkan come forth as a champion to fight single handed, our man
will slay him and will slay the other Moslem Knights, till not
one is left.  And I purpose this night to sacre you all with the
Holy Incense." When the Emirs heard these words they kissed the
ground before him.  Now the incense which he designated was the
excrement of the Chief Patriarch, the denier, the defiler of the
Truth, and they sought for it with such instance, and they so
highly valued it that the high priests of the Greeks used to send
it to all the countries of the Christians in silken wraps after
mixing it with musk and ambergris.  Hearing of it Kings would pay
a thousand gold pieces for every dram and they sent for and
sought it to fumigate brides withal; and the Chief Priests and
the great Kings were wont to use a little of it as collyrium for
the eyes and as a remedy in sickness and colic; and the
Patriarchs used to mix their own skite [FN#390] with it, for that
the skite of the Chief Patriarch could not suffice for ten
countries. [FN#391] So, as soon as dawn was seen and the morning
shone with its shine and sheen, the horsemen ran to their spears
full keen, and King Afridun,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.

                When it was the Ninetieth Night,

 She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, as soon as dawn
was seen and the morning shone with its shine and sheen, the
horsemen ran to their spears full keen and King Afridun summoned
his chief Knights and Nobles and invested them with dresses of
honour; and, drawing the sign of the cross on their brows,
incensed them with the incense which as aforesaid was the skite
of the Chief Patriarch, the Cohen, the Heresiarch.  This
incensing done, he called for Luka bin Shamlut, surnamed the
Sword of the Messiah; and, after fumigating him and rubbing his
palate with the Holy Merde, caused him to snuff it and smeared
his cheeks and anointed his moustaches with the rest.  Now there
was no stouter champion in the land of Roum than this accursed
Luka, nor any better at bending of bow or sway of sword or lunge
with lance on the day of devoir; but he was foul of favour, for
his face was as the face of an ass, his shape that of an ape and
his look as the look of a malignant snake: his presence was
grievouser than parting from the beloved make; and blacker than
night was his blackness and more fetid than the lion was his
breath for foulness; more crooked than a bow was his crookedness
and grimmer than the leopard was his ugliness, and he was branded
with the mark of the Infidels on face. [FN#392] After this he came
up to King Afridun and kissed his feet and stood before him; and
the King said to him, "I desire thou go out against Sharrkan,
King of Damascus, son of Omar bin al-Nu'uman, and deliver us from
this affliction." Quoth Luka, "Hearkening and obedience;" and the
King made the sign of the cross on his forehead and felt assured
of help from Heaven being near hand.  Then Luka went out from the
presence and the accursed one mounted a sorrel horse; he was clad
in a red robe and a hauberk of gold set with jewels, and he bore
a trident spear, as he were Iblis the damned on the day of
drewing out his hosts war to darraign.  Then he rode forward, he
and his horde of Infidels, even as though they were driving to
the Fire, preceded by a herald, crying aloud in the Arabic tongue
and saying, "Ho, sect of Mohammed (upon whom be salutation and
salvation!), let none of you come out but your champion Sharrkan,
the Sword of Al-Islam, Lord of Damascus in Sham [FN#393]!" Nor had
he made an end of speaking, when arose a tumult in the plain; all
the people heard the strain and the whole moving bodies of the
armies twain called to mind the Day of Complain.  Then the
cowards trembled and all necks turned towards the sound, and lo! 
it was King Sharrkan, son of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman.  For when
his brother, Zau al-Makan, saw that accursed one push out on the
plain, and heard the pursuivant, he turned to Sharrkan and said
to him, "Of a surety they seek for thee." Said he, "Should it so
be, 'twere most pleasing to me." So when they made sure of the
matter and heard the herald crying in the plain, "Let none of you
come out against me save Sharrkan," they knew this cursed Luka to
be champion of the land of Roum who had sworn to sweep the earth
clean of Moslems.  Now he was one of the greatest of villains, a
wretch who caused hearts to pain; and the DayIamites, Turks and
Kurds dreaded his might and main.  Presently Sharrkan crave at
him like a lion angry grim, mounted on a courser like a wild
gazelle flying snell and slim; and coming nigh to him made the
spear he hent to shake as it were a darting snake, and recited
these couplets,

"I have a sorrel steed, whose pride is fain to bear the rein, *
     Shall give thee what thou likest not and make thee feel his
     main:
I have a handy limber spear full bright and keen of point, * Upon
     whose shaft the dam of Death her throny seat hath ta'en:
I have a trenchant glaive of Hind; and, when I bare its face * Of
     scabbard" veil, from out its brow the rays of levee rain."

Luka understood not the sense of his speech nor did he apprehend
the vehemence of the verse; but he smote his forehead with his
hand, in honour of the Cross drawn thereon and kissed it; then he
couched his throw spear and ran at Sharrkan.  But first he tossed
the javelin with one hand in air to such height that it was lost
to the spectators' sight; and, catching it with the other hand as
do the jugglers, hurled it at Sharrkan.  It flew from his grasp
like a shooting star and folk clamoured and feared for Sharrkan;
but, as the spear flew near him, he put out his hand and caught
it in full flight to the amazement of all who saw the sight. 
Then he shook it with the hand that took it till it was well nigh
broken, and hurled it so high into the welkin that it disappeared
from view.  As it descended, he caught it again with the other
hand, in less than the twinkling of an eye, and cried out from
his heart core, saying, "By the truth of Him who created the
sevenfold skies, I will assuredly make this cursed wight a byword
for mankind to despise!" Then threw he the throw spear at Luka,
who thought to do as Sharrkan had done and put forth his hand to
trend it in mid flight; but Sharrkan prevented him, and sped at
him a second throw spear which smote him and the point fell on
his forehead, in the very centre of the sign of the Cross, and
Allah hurried his soul to the Fire and Dwelling place
dire. [FN#394]  But when the Infidels saw Luka bin Shamlut fall
slain, they buffeted their faces and they cried, "Alas!" and "Woe
worth the day!" and called for aid upon the Abbots of the
monasteries,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

              When it was the Ninety-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Infidels saw Luka bin Shamlut fall slain, they buffeted their
faces and cried, "Alas!" and "Woe worth the day!" and called upon
the Abbots of the monasteries and cried, "Where be the crosses?"
So the Religious offered up prayers and the Christians all drew
together against Sharrkan; and, brandishing their scymitars and
lances, rushed forward to the attack.  Then army met army and
breasts fell under hoof, whilst spear and sword ruled the day and
forearms and wrists grew weak and the coursers seemed created
without legs; [FN#395] nor did the herald of-war cease calling to
fight, till arms were aweary and day took flight and night came
on with darkness dight.  So the two hosts drew apart, whilst
every brave staggered like a drunken knave, for that with so much
cut and thrust they strave; and the place was choked with the
slain; fell were the wounds and the hurt knew not by whom they
fell.  Then Sharrkan joined his brother, Zau al-Makan, and the
Chamberlain and the Wazir Dandan, and said to them, "Verily Allah
hath opened a door for the Infidels to fall, praised be the Lord
of the Worlds one and all!" Replied Zau al-Makan, "Let us never
cease to praise Allah, for that He hath dispelled trouble from
the Arab and the Ajam.  Indeed the folk, generation after
generation, shall tell of thy derring do against the accursed
Luka, the falsifier of the Evangel; [FN#396] of thy catching the
throng spear in mid-flight, and how the enemy of Allah among men
thou didst smite; and thy fame shall endure until the end of
time." Then said Sharrkan, "Harkye, O grand Chamberlain and
doughty Capitayne!" and he answered, "Adsum!" [FN#397] Quoth
Sharrkan, "Take with thee the Wazir Dandan and twenty thousand
horse, and lead them seven parasangs towards the sea, and force
the march till ye shall have come near the shore, and there
remain only two parasangs between thee and the foe.  Then ambush
ye in the hollows of the ground till ye hear the tumult of the
Infidels disembarking from their ships; and the war cry from
every side strike your ear and ye know that the sabres have begun
labour between us and them; and, whenso ye see our troops falling
back, as if defeated, and all the Infidels following them, as
well those in front as those from the seaward and the tents, do
ye still lie in wait for them: but as soon as ye see the standard
with the words, There is no god but the God, and Mohammed is
God's Apostle (on whom be salutation and salvation!), then up
with the green banner, and do your endeavour and fall on their
rear and shout, 'Alla ho Akbar!  Allah is most Great!' and circle
round that they may not interpose between the retreating army and
the sea." He replied, "To hear is to obey!"; and forthright they
agreed upon this matter and they went forth.  Now the Chamberlain
took with himself the Wazir Dandan and twenty thousand men even
as Sharrkan had commanded.  As soon as dawned the morn, the
troops sprung to horse when they had donned their armour gear and
drawn the scymitar and slung the spear.  Then the Christians
dispread themselves over hill and dale and the
Ecclesiasts [FN#398] cried out and all heads were bared, and those
in the ships hoisted the Cross at their mast heads and began
making for shore from every side, and landed their horses and get
them ready for fight and fray, whilst the sword blades glittered
bright and the javelins glanced like levee light on mail shirt
white; and all joined fight and the grind mill of Death whirled
round and ground those who fought from horse and aground: heads
from bodies flew end tongues mute grew and eyes no vision knew. 
Scymitars strave with utmost strain and heads flew over the
battle plain; gall bladders crave and wrists were shorn in twain;
steeds plashed in pools of gore and beards were gripped right
sore; the host of Al-Islam called out, saying, "On the Prince of
Mankind be blessings and peace, and to the Compassionate glory
and praise, which ne'er shall cease, for His boons which aye
increase;" and the host of the Infidels shouted, "Glory to the
Cross and the Belt and the vine press juice, and the wine presser
and the Priests and the Monks and the Festival of Palms and the
Metropolitan!" Now Zau al-Makan and Sharrkan held back and their
troops gave way and feigned flight from before the enemy, while
the Infidel array pressed hard upon them deeming them in rout,
and made ready to foin and hew.  Then the meiny of the Moslems
raised their voices, reciting the first verses of the Chapter of
the Cow, [FN#399] whilst the dead were trampled under hoofs of
steeds, and the heralds of the Greeks cried out, "Ho, servants of
the Messiah!  Ho, people of the True Faith!  Ho, followers of the
Primate! [FN#400] Verily Divine grace upon you opes; for see, the
hosts of Al Islam like birds with broken wings incline to elope! 
So turn ye not to them your backs, but let your swords cleave
deep in their necks and hold not your hands from them, else are
ye outcasts from the Messiah, Mary's son, who spoke even when a
cradled one!" [FN#401] Now Afridun, King of Constantinople, deemed
that the Infidels were victorious, knowing not that this was but
a clever stratagem of the Moslems, and sent to King Hardub of
Roum congratulations on success, adding, "Availed us naught but
the Holy Merde of the Arch Patriarch, whose fragrance exhaled
from the beards and mustachios of the slaves of the Cross near
and far; and I swear, by the Miracles of the Messiah; and by thy
daughter Abrizah, the Nazarene, the Mariolater; and by the Waters
of Baptism, that I will not leave upon the earth a single
defender of Al- Islam!  And to the bitter end will I carry out
this plan." So the messenger betook himself with the address to
King Hardub, whilst the Infidels called to one another saying,
"Take we vengeance wreak for Luka!"--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

              When it was the Ninety-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Infidels called to one another, saying, "Take we vengeance wreak
for Luka!" while Hardub King of Greece cried aloud, "Ho, to our
revenge for Abrizah!" Thereupon King Zau al-Makan shouted "Ho,
servants of the Requiting King!: smite the children of denial and
disobedience with the blanch of sword and the brown of spear!" So
the Moslems returned to the Infidels and plied them with the keen
edged scymitar, whilst their herald cried aloud, "Up, and at the
foes of the Faith, all ye who love the Prophet Elect, with hope
of salvation on the Day of Fear, to win favour of the Bountiful,
the Forgiving One; for verily the Garden of Paradise is under the
shadow of swords!" And behold, Sharrkan and his men charged down
upon the Infidels and cut off their retreat and wheeled and
tourneyed among the ranks; when lo!  a knight of goodly presence
opened a passage through the army of Unbelievers and circled
hither and thither amongst the Deniers, cutting and thrusting and
covering the ground with heads and trunks, so that the Faithless
feared him and their necks bent under his lunge and hew.  He was
girt with two swords, his glances and his brand, and he was armed
with two lances, one of bamboo cane and the other his straight
wand like shape; and his flowing hair stood him in stead of many
warriors, even as saith the poet,

"Laud not long hair, [FN#402] except it be dispread * In two fold
     locks, on day of fight and fray,
O'er youth who bears his lance 'twixt flank and thigh, * From
     many a whis kered knight to win the day."

And as singeth another,

"I say to him, what while he slings his sword, * 'For sword shall
     serve those looks that sword like show!'
Says he, 'My sabre looks for those I love, * My sword for those
     who sweets of love unknow!'"

When Sharrkan saw him, he said to him, "I conjure thee by the
Koran and the attributes of the Compassionate One, O Champion of
the Champions!  tell me who thou art: for verily by thy deeds
this day thou hast pleased the Requiting King, whom one thing
distracteth not from other thing; in that thou hast been
discomforting the children of impiety and in rebellion
revelling." Then cried the Cavalier to him saying, "Thou art he
who madest brother covenant with me but yesterday: how quickly
thou hast forgotten me!" Thereupon he withdrew his mouth
veil, [FN#403] so that what was hidden of his beauty was
disclosed, and lo!  it was none other than Zau al-Makan.  Then
Sharrkan rejoiced in his brother, save that he feared for him the
rush of fighting and the crush of braves a smiting; and this for
two reasons, the first, his tender age and exposure to the evil
eye, and the second, that his safety was to the kingdom the
greater of the two overshadowing wings.  So he said to him, "O
King!  thou riskest thy life, so join thy steed to mine; in very
sooth I fear for thee from the foe; and better thou stint
hazarding thyself forth of these squadrons, that we may shoot at
the enemy thine unerring shaft." Quoth Zau al-Makan, "I desire to
even thee in fray and I will not be niggard of myself before thee
in the melay." Then the host of Al-Islam, heaping itself upon the
Infidels, girt them on all sides, warred on them a right Holy
War, and brake the power of the children of impiety and pride and
stowre.  But King Afridun sighed when he saw the evil wreak that
had fallen on the Greek, and they turned their backs from fight
and addressed themselves to flight, making for the ships, when
lo!  there came out upon them from the seacoast another host, led
by the Minister Dandan, the champion who was wont to make
champions bite the dust, and to lay load on them with cut and
thrust.  Nor less came forth the Emir Bahram, Lord of the
Provinces of Sham, amid twenty thousand horse doughty of arm; and
the host of Al-Islam pressed them in front and on flank and
wrought them grievous harm.  Then a body of the Moslems turned
against those who in the ships remained, and perdition on them
rained, till they threw themselves into the main, and they slew
of them many slain, more than a hundred thousand noblemen, nor
was one of their champions, great or small, saved from bale and
bane.  Moreover, they took their ships, with all the money and
treasure and cargo, save a score of keel, and the Moslems got
that loot whose like was never gotten in by gone years; nor was
such cut and thrust ever heard of by men's ears. [FN#404] Now
amongst the booty were fifty thousand horses, besides treasure
and spoil past reckoning and arithmetic, whereat the Moslems
rejoiced with an exceeding joy for that Allah had given them
victory and protection.  Such was the case with them; but as
regards the fugitive Infidels they soon reached Constantinople,
whither the tidings preceded them that King Afridun had prevailed
over the Moslems; so quoth the ancient dame, Zat al-Dawahi, "I
know that my son Hardub, King of Roum, is no runagate and that he
feareth not the Islamitic hosts, but will restore the whole world
to the Nazarene faith." Then she bade the Great King, Afridun,
give command that the city be decorated, and the people held
festival high and drank their wines drunkenly and knew not the
decrees of Destiny.  Now whilst they were in the midst of their
rejoicings, behold, the raven of dule and downfall croaked over
them, and up came the twenty fugitive ships wherein was the King
of Caesarea.  So King Afridun, Lord of Constantinople, met them
on the sea shore, and they told him all that had befallen them
from the Moslem, and they wept sore and groaned and moaned; and
rejoicing at weal was turned into dismay for unheal; and they
informed him concerning Luka son of Shamlut, how calamity had
betided him and how Death had shot him with his shaft.  Thereat
the horrors of Doomday rose upon King Afridun, [FN#405] and he
knew that there was no making straight their crook.  Then came up
from them the sound of weeping and wailing; the city was full of
men mourning and the keepers were keening, and sighs and cries
were heard from all sides.  And when King Hardub of Greece met
King Afridun he told him the truth of the case and how the flight
of the Moslems was by way of stratagem and deceit, and said to
him, "Look not to see any of the army, save those who have
already reached thee." When King Afridun heard these words he
fell down in a fainting fit, with his nose under his feet; and,
as soon as he revived, he exclaimed, "Surely the Messiah was
wroth with them that he caused the Moslems to prevail over them!"
Then came the Arch Patriarch sadly to the King who said to him,
"O our father, annihilation hath overtaken our army and the
Messiah hath punished us!" Replied the Patriarch, "Grieve not nor
feel concerned, for it cannot be but that one of you have sinned
against the Messiah, and all have been punished for his offence;
but now we will read prayers for you in the churches, that the
Mohammeden hosts may be repelled from you." After which the old
woman, Zat al-Dawahi, came to Afridun and said to him, "O King,
verily the Moslem hosts are many, and we shall never overcome
them save by wile: wherefore I purpose to work upon them by guile
and repair to this army of Al-Islam, haply I may win my wish of
their leader and slay their champion, even as I slew his father. 
If my stratagem succeed in his case, not one of the host he leads
shall return to his native land, for all are strong only because
of him; but I desire to have some Christian dwellers of Syria,
such as go out every month and year to sell their goods, that
they may help me (for this they can do) in carrying out my plan."
Replied the King, "Be it so whenever thou wilt." So she bade
fetch an hundred men, natives of Najran, [FN#406] in Sham, and the
King asked them, "Have ye not heard what hath befallen the
Christians with the Moslems?" "Yes," answered they; and he
rejoined, "Know ye that this woman hath devoted her life to the
Messiah and purposeth to go forth with you, disguised as
Monotheists and Mohammedans, to work out a device which shall
profit us and hinder the Moslem from us: say, then, are ye also
willing to devote yourselves to the Anointed and I will give you
a quintal of gold? [FN#407] He of you who escapeth shall have the
money, and him of you who dieth will the Messiah reward." "O
King," replied they, "we will devote our lives to the Messiah,
and we will be thy sacrifice." Thereupon the old woman took all
she required of aromatic roots and placed them in water which she
boiled over the fire till the black essence of them was
extracted.  She waited till the decoction was cold, then dipped
the corner of a long kerchief therein and stained her face
therewith.  Moreover, she donned over her clothes a long
gaberdine with an embroidered border and took in her hand a
rosary, and afterwards went in to King Afridun, who knew her not,
nor did any of his companions know her, till she discovered
herself to them: and there was none in the assembly but who
thanked and praised her for her cunning; and her son rejoiced and
said, "May the Messiah never fail thee!" Thereupon she took with
her the Syrian Christians, and set out for the army of Baghdad.--
And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

              When it was the Ninety-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King
Afridun heard these words, he fell into a fainting fit with his
nose under his feet; and, as soon as he revived, fear fluttered
the scrotum [FN#408] below his belly and he complained to the
ancient dame, Zat al-Dawahi.  Now this accursed old woman was a
witch of the witches, past mistress in sorcery and deception;
wanton and wily, deboshed and deceptious; with foul breath, red
eyelids, yellow cheeks, dull brown face, eyes bleared, mangy
body, hair grizzled, back humped, skin withered and wan and
nostrils which ever ran.  But she had studied the scriptures of
Al-Islam and had made the Pilgrimage to the Holy House of Meccah
and all this that she might come to the knowledge of the
Mohammedan ordinances and the miraculous versets of the Koran;
and she had professed Judaism in the Holy City of
Jerusalem [FN#409] for two years' space, that she might master the
magic of men and demons; so that she was a plague of plagues and
a pest of pests, wrong headed as to belief and to no religion
fief.  Now the chief reason of her sojourn with her son, King
Hardub of Greece, was on account of the slave virgins at his
court: for she was given to tribadism [FN#410] and could not exist
without sapphism or she went mad: so if any damsel pleased her,
she was wont to teach her the art of rubbing clitoris against
clitoris and would anoint her with saffron [FN#411] till she
fainted away for excess of volupty.  Whoso obeyed her she was
wont to favour and make her son incline towards her; but whoso
repelled her she would contrive to destroy; and so she abode for
a length of time.  This was known to Marjanah and Rayhanah and
Utrijah, the handmaids of Abrizah, and their Princess loathed the
old woman and abhorred to lie with her, because of the rank smell
from her armpits, the stench of her fizzles more fetid than
carrion, and the roughness of her hide coarser than palm fibre. 
She was wont to bribe those who rubbed parts with her by means of
jewels and instructions; but Abrizah held aloof from her and
sought refuge with the Omnipotent, the Omniscient; for, by Allah,
right well quoth the poet,

"Ho thou who grovellest low before the great * Nor over fording
     lesser men dost blench
Who gildest dross by dirham gathering, * No otter scent disguises
     carrion stench!

And now to return to the story of her stratagem and the woes of
her working.  Presently she departed, taking the chief Nazarenes
with their hosts, and turned towards the army of the Moslems. 
Whereupon King Hardub went in to King Afridun and said to him, "O
King, we have no need of the Chief Patriarch nor of his prayers,
but will consult my mother's counsel and observe what she will do
with her craft unending against the Moslem hosts; for these are
marching with all their power, they will soon be upon us and they
will encircle us on all sides." When King Afridun heard this,
terror took hold upon his heart and he wrote letters, without
stay or delay, to all the nations of the Nazarenes, saying, "It
behoveth none of the Messiahites or Cross knights to hold back,
especially the folk of the strongholds and forts: but let them
all come to us, foot and horse, women and children, for the
Moslem hosts already tread our soil.  So haste!  haste ye!  ere
what we fear to us here appear." Thus much concerning them; but
regarding the work of the old woman, Zat al-Dawahi; when she went
forth from the city with her suite, she clad them in the clothing
of Moslem merchants, having provided herself with an hundred
mules carrying stuffs of Antioch, such as goldwoven satins and
royal brocades and so forth.  And she had taken a letter from
King Afridun to the following effect: "These be merchantmen from
the land of Sham who have been with us: so it besitteth none to
do them harm or hindrance, nor take tax and tithe of them, till
they reach their homes and safe places, for by merchants a
country flourisheth, and these are no men of war nor of ill
faith." Then quoth the accursed Zat al-Dawahi to those with her,
"Verily I wish to work out a plot for the destruction of the
Moslem." Replied they, "O Queen, command us whatso thou wilt; we
are at thy disposal and may the Messiah never disappoint thy
dealings!" Then she donned a gown of fine white wool and rubbed
her forehead, till she made a great mark as of a scar and
anointed it with an ointment of her own fashion, so that it shone
with prodigious sheen.  Now the old hag was lean bodied and
hollow eyed, and she bound her legs tightly round with
cords [FN#412] just above her feet, till she drew near the Moslem
camp, when she unwound them, leaving their marks deeply embedded
in her ankles.  Then she anointed the wheels with dragon's blood
and bade her companions beat her with a severe beating, and set
her in a chest and, quoth she, "Cry abroad the Refrain of
Unity, [FN#413] nor fear from it aught of damage!" Replied they,
"How can we beat thee, who be our sovereign lady, Zat al-Dawahi,
mother of the King we glory in?" Then said she, "We blame not nor
deal reproach to him who goeth to the jakes, and in need evil
becometh good deed.  When ye have set me in the chest, take it
and make it one of the bales and place it on mule back and fare
forth with it and the other goods through the Moslem camp, and
fear ye no blame.  And if any of the Moslems hinder you, give up
the mules and their lading and be take yourselves to their King,
Zau al-Makan, and implore his protection saying, 'We were in the
land of the Infidels and they took nothing from us, but wrote us
a passport, that none shall do us hindrance or work our
mischance.' If he ask you, 'What profit had ye of your property
in the land of Roum?' answer him, 'We profited in the deliverance
of a pious man, who had been bound down in an underground cell
nigh fifteen years, crying out for help yet none helped him. 
Nay, the Infidels tortured him night and day.  We knew not this;
but, after we had tarried in Constantinople for some time, having
sold our goods and bought others in their stead, we determined on
and made ready for a return to our native land.  We spent that
night conversing about our journey and when day broke, we saw
figured upon the wall a human form and as we drew nigh it,
behold, it moved and said, 'O Moslems, is there amongst you one
who is minded to woo the favour of the Lord of the three
Worlds?' [FN#414] 'How so?' asked we; and the figure answered,
'Know that Allah hath made me speak to you, to the intent that
your faith be fortified, and that your belief embolden you and
that you may go forth of the country of the Infidels and repair
to the Moslem host; for with them wones the Sword of the Com
passionate One, of our Age the Champion, King Sharrkan, by whom
He shall conquer Constantinople town and destroy the sect of the
Nazarene.  And when ye shall have journeyed three days, you will
find an hermitage known as the Hermitage of the ascetic
Matruhina [FN#415] and containing a cell; visit it with pure
intent and contrive to arrive there by force of will, for therein
is a Religious from the Holy City, Jerusalem, by name Abdullah,
and he is one of the devoutest of mankind, endowed with the power
of working saintly miracles [FN#416] such as dispel doubts and
obscurity.  Certain of the monks seized him by fraud and shut him
up in a souterrain where he hath lain a long time.  By his
deliverance you will please the Lord of Faithful Men, for such
release is better than fighting for the Faith.'" Now when the
ancient dame and those with her had agreed upon such words, she
said, "As soon as that which I impart shall reach the ears of
King Sharrkan, say him further, 'Hearing this from that image we
knew that the holy man'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

              When it was the Ninety-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
old woman, Zat al-Dawahi, and those with her had agreed upon such
words, she said, "Now as soon as that which I impart shall reach
the ears of King Sharrkan say him further, 'Hearing these words
from that image we knew that the holy man was indeed of the
chiefest devotees and Allah's servants of purest qualities; so we
made three days' march till we came in sight of that hermitage,
and then we went up to it and passed the day in buying and
selling, as is the wont of merchants.  As soon as day had
departed our sight and night was come to darken light, we
repaired to the cell wherein was the dungeon, and we heard the
holy man, after chanting some verses of the Koran, repeat the
following couplets,

'My heart disheartened is, my breast is strait, * And sinks my
     soul in sea of bale and bate
Unless escape be near I soon shall die; * And Death were better
     than this doleful strait:
O Lightning an thou light my home and folk, * An their still
     brighter charms thy shine abate,
Say, what my path to meet them, being barred * By wars, and
     barricado'd succour's gate?'

"When once ye have brought me into the Moslem camp, and I mix
with them you shall see," the old woman continued, "how I will
make shift to beguile them and slay them all, even to the last
man." The Nazarenes hearing whet she said, kissed her hands and
set her in the chest, after they had beaten her with a grievous
beating in obedience to her commands, for they saw it was
incumbent on them to do her bidding in this; then they all made
for the Moslem host as hath erst been said.  Such was the case
with the damned hag, Zat al-Dawahi and her companions; but as
regards the Mohammeden army, they indeed, after Allah had given
them victory over their enemies and they had plundered everything
in the ships of money and hoards, all sat down to converse with
one another and Zau al-Makan said to his brother Sharrkan,
"Verily, Allah hath granted us to prevail because of our just
dealing and discipline and concord amongst ourselves; wherefore
continue, O Sharrkan, to obey my commandment, in submission to
Allah (be He exalted and extolled!), for I mean to slay ten Kings
in blood revenge for my sire, to cut the throat of fifty thousand
Greeks and to enter Constantinople." Replied Sharrkan, "My life
be thy ransom against death!  Needs must I follow out the Holy
War, though I wone many a year in their country.  But I have, O
my brother, in Damascus a daughter, named Kuzia Fakan, whom I
love heartily for she is one of the marvels of the time and she
will soon be of age.' Said Zau al-Makan, "And I also have left my
wife with child and near her time, nor do I know what Allah will
vouchsafe me by her.  But promise me, O my brother, that if Allah
bless me with a son, thou wilt grant me thy daughter for wife to
him, and make covenant with me and pledge me thy faith thereon."
"With love and good will, replied Sharrkan; and, stretching out
his hand to his brother, he said, If she bring thee a son, I will
give him my daughter Kuzia Fakan, to wife." At this Zau al-Makan
rejoiced, and they fell to congratulating each other on the
victory over the enemy.  And the Wazir Dandan also congratulated
the two brothers and said to them, "Know, O ye Kings, that Allah
hath given us the victory, for that we have devoted our lives to
Him (be He exalted and ex tolled!); and we have left our homes
and households; and it is my counsel that we follow up the foe
and press upon him and harass him, so haply Allah shall enable us
to win our wishes, and we shall destroy our enemies, branch and
root.  If it please you, do ye go down in these ships and sail
over the sea, whilst we fare forward by land and bear the brunt
of battle and the thrust of fight." And the Minister Dandan
ceased not to urge them to combat and repeated his words who
said,

"To slay my foes is chiefest bliss I wist, * And on the courser's
     back be borne a list;
Comes promising tryst a messenger from friend * Full oft, when
     comes the friend withouten tryst."

And these words of another,

"War for my mother (an I live) I'll take; * Spear for my brother;
     scymitar for sire
With every shag haired brave who meets his death * Smiling, till
     won from Doom his dear desire!"

And when the Wazir ended his verses, he said, "Praise be to Him
who aided us dear victory to uphold and who hath given us spoil
of silver and fine gold!" Then Zau al-Makan commanded the army to
depart; and they fared on forcing their marches for
Constantinople, till they came to a wide and spacious champaign,
full of all things fair and fain, with wild cattle frisking and
gazelles pacing to and fro across the plain.  Now they had
traversed great deserts and drink had been six days cut off from
them, when they drew near this meadow and saw therein waters
founting and ripe fruits daunting and that land as it were
Paradise; for it had donned its adornments and decked
itself. [FN#417]  Gently waved the branches of its trees drunken
with the new wine of the dew, and combined with the nectar of
Tasnim the soft breathings of the morning breeze.  Mind and gazer
were confounded by its beauty, even as saith the poet,

"Behold this lovely garden!  'tis as though * Spring o'er its
     frame her greeny cloak had spread.
Looking with fleshly eyne, thou shalt but sight * A lake whose
     waters balance in their bed,
But look with spirit eyes and lo!  shalt see * Glory in every
     leaf o'erwaves thy head."

And as another saith,

"The stream's a cheek by sunlight rosy dyed, * Whose down [FN#418]
     is creeping shade of tamarisk stems
Round legs of tree trunks waveless roll in rings * Silvern, and
     blossoms are the diadems."

When Zau al-Makan saw this champaign, with its trees bowing and
its flowers blooming and its birds warbling, he called to his
brother Sharrkan and said, "O my brother, verily in Damascus is
naught the like of this place.  We will not march from it save
after three days, that we may take rest ourselves and that the
army of Al-Islam may regain strength and their souls be fortified
to encounter the blamed Infidels." So they halted therein and
while camping behold, they heard a noise of voices from afar, and
Zau al-Makan asked the cause thereof, and was answered that a
caravan of merchants from the Land of Syria had halted there to
rest and that the Moslem troops had come on them and had haply
seized something of the goods which they had brought from the
country of the Infidels.  After a while up came the merchants,
crying out and appealing to the King for aidance.  When Zau al-
Makan saw this, he bade them be brought before him and, when in
presence they said to him, "O King, we have been in the country
of the Infidels and they plundered us of nothing: why then do our
brothers the Moslems despoil our goods, and we in their own land? 
Of a truth when we saw your troops, we went up to them and they
robbed us of what we had with us and we have now reported to thee
all that hath befallen us." Thereupon they brought out to him the
letter of the King of Constantinople, and Sharrkan read it and
said, "We will presently restore to you what hath been taken from
you; but yet it behoveth you not to carry merchandise to the
country of the Infidels." Replied they, "O our Lord, in very
sooth Allah despatched us thither that we might win what
Ghazi [FN#419] never won the like of, not even thou in all thy
razzias." Asked Sharrkan, "What was it ye won?" "O King,"
answered they, "we will not tell thee save in private; for if
this matter be noised among the folk, haply it may come to the
ears of some, [FN#420] and this will be the cause of our ruin and
of the ruin of all Moslems who resort to the land of the Greeks."
Now they had hidden the chest wherein was the damned Zat al-
Dawahi.  So Zau al-Makan and his brother brought them to a
private place, where they laid bare to both of them the story of
the devotee, and wept till they made the two Kings weep.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

              When it was the Ninety-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Nazarenes who wore merchants' weed, when brought to a private
place by Zau al-Makan and his brother Sharrkan, laid bare to both
of them the story of the devotee and wept till they made the two
Kings weep and repeated to them all which had been taught by the
old witch Zat al-Dawahi.  Thereupon Sharrkan's heart yearned to
the devotee and he was moved to ruth for him and was fired with
zeal for the service of Almighty Allah.  So quoth he to them,
"Did ye rescue this holy man or is he still in the hermitage?"
Quoth they, "We delivered him and slew the hermit, fearing for
our lives; after which we made haste to fly for dread of death;
but a trusty man told us that in this hermitage are quintals of
gold and silver and stones of price." Then they fetched the chest
and brought out the accursed old woman, as she were a cassia
pod [FN#421] for excess of blackness and leanness, and she was
laden with the same fetters and shackles.  When Zau al-Makan and
the bystanders saw her, they took her for a man of the best of
Allah's devotees and surpassing in pious qualities, more
especially because of the shining of her forehead for the
ointment wherewith she had anointed her face.  So Zau al-Makan
and Sharrkan wept sore; then they rose up in honour and kissed
her hands and feet, sobbing aloud: but she signed to them and
said, "Cease this weeping and hear my words. Hereat they dried
their tears in obedience to her bidding, and she said, "Know ye
both that I was content to accept what my Lord did unto me, for I
kenned that the affliction which befel me was a trial from Him
(be He exalted and extolled!); and whoso hath not patience under
calamity and tribulation, for him there is no coming to the
delights of Paradise.  I had indeed supplicated Him that I might
return to my native land, not as a compensation for the
sufferings decreed to me, but that I might die under the horse
hoofs of warriors fighting for the Faith who, being slain in
fray, live again without suffering death." [FN#422] Then she
repeated the following couplets,

"Our Fort is Tor, [FN#423] and flames the fire of fight: * Moses
     art thou and this is time for aid:
Cast down thy rod, 'twill swallow all they wrought, * Nor dread
     for men their ropes be vipers made. [FN#424]
For Chapters read on fight day lines of foes, * And on their
     necks 'grave versets [FN#425] wi' thy blade!"

When the old woman had ended her verse, her eyes overflowed with
tears and her forehead under the unguent shone like gleaming
light, and Sharrkan rose and kissed her hand and caused food be
brought before her: but she refused it, saying, "I have not
broken my fast by day for fifteen years; and how should I break
it at such a time when my Lord hath been bountiful to me in
delivering me from the captivity of the Infidels and removing
from me that which was more grievous to me than torment of fire? 
I will wait till sun down." So when it was nightfall, Sharrkan
and Zau al-Makan came and served her with food and said, "Eat, O
ascetic!" But she said, "This is no time for eating; it is the
time for worshipping the Requiting King." Then she stood up in
the prayer niche and remained praying till the night was spent;
and she ceased not to do after this fashion for three days and
nights, sitting not but at the time of the Salam or
salutation [FN#426] ending with several prayers.  When Zau al-
Makan saw her on this wise, firm belief in her get hold of his
heart and he said to Sharrkan, "Cause a tent of perfumed leather
to be pitched for this Religious, and appoint a body servant to
wait upon him." On the fourth day she called for food; so they
brought her all kinds of meats that could seduce the sense or
delight the sight; but of all this she would eat only a scone
with salt.  Then she again turned to her fast and, as the night
came, she rose anew to pray; when Sharrkan said to Zau al-Makan,
"Verily, this man carrieth renunciation of the world to the
extreme of renouncing, and, were it not for this Holy War, I
would join myself to him and worship Allah in his service, till I
came before His presence.  And now I desire to enter his tent and
talk with him for an hour." Quoth Zau al-Makan, "And I also:
tomorrow we sally forth to fight against Constantinople, and we
shall find no time like the present." Said the Wazir Dandan, "And
I no less desire to see this ascetic; haply he will pray for me
that I find death in this Holy War and come to the presence of my
Lord, for I am aweary of the world." So as soon as night had
darkened, they repaired to the tent of that witch, Zat al-Dawahi;
and, seeing her standing to pray, they drew near her and fell a
weeping for pity of her; but she paid no heed to them till
midnight was past, when she ended her orisons by pronouncing the
salutation.  Then she turned to them and after wishing them long
life, asked them "Wherefore come ye?", whereto they answered, "O
thou holy man!  diddest thou not hear us weep around thee?" She
rejoined, "To him who standeth in the presence of Allah,
remaineth no existence in time, either for hearing any or for
seeing aught about him." Quoth they, "We would have thee recount
to us the cause of thy captivity and pray for us this night, for
that will profit us more than the possession of Constantinople."
Now when she heard their words she said, "By Allah, were ye not
the Emirs of the Moslems, I would not relate to you aught of this
at any time; for I complain not but to Allah alone.  However, to
you I will relate the circumstances of my captivity.  Know, then,
that I was in the saintly City of Jerusalem with certain
ecstatics and inspired men, and did not magnify myself among
them, for that Allah (be He exalted and extolled!) had endowed me
with humility and abnegation, till I chanced to go down to the
sea one night and walked upon the water.  Then entered into me
pride; whence I know not, and I said to myself, 'Who like me can
walk the water?' And my heart from that time hardened and Allah
afflicted me with the love of travel.  So I journeyed to Roum
land and visited every part for a whole year, and left no place
but therein I worshiped Allah.  When I came to this spot, [FN#427]
I clomb the mountain and saw there an hermitage, inhabited by a
monk called Matrubina, who, when he sighted me, came out and
kissed my hands and feet and said, 'Verily, I have seen thee
since thou enteredst the land of the Greeks, and thou hast filled
me with longing for the land of Al-Islam.' Then he took my hand
and carried me into that hermitage, and brought me to a dark
room; and, when I entered it unawares, he locked the door on me
and left me there forty days, without meat or drink; for it was
his intent to kill me by delay.  It chanced one day, that a
Knight called Dakianus [FN#428] came to the hermitage, accompanied
by ten squires and his daughter Tamasil, a girl whose beauty was
incom parable.  When they entered that hermitage, the monk
Matruhina told them of me, and the Knight said, 'Bring him out,
for surely there is not on him a bird's meal of meat.' So they
opened the door of the dark room and found me standing in the
niche, praying and reciting the Koran and glorifying Allah and
humbling myself before the Almighty.  When they saw me in this
state Matrohina exclaimed, 'This man is indeed a sorcerer of the
sorcerers!'; and hearing his words, they all came in on me,
Dakianus and his company withal, and they beat me with a grievous
beating, till I desired death and reproached myself, saying,
'This is his reward who exalteth himself and who prideth himself
on that which Allah hath vouchsafed to him, beyond his own
competence!  And thou, O my soul, verily self esteem and
arrogance have crept into thee.  Dost thou not know that pride
angereth the Lord and hardeneth the heart and bringeth men to the
Fire?' Then they laid me in fetters and returned me to my place
which was the dungeon under ground.  Every three days, they threw
me down a scone of barley bread and a draught of water; and every
month or two the Knight came to the hermitage.  Now his daughter
Tamasil had grown up, for she was nine years old when I first saw
her, and fifteen years passed over me in captivity, so that she
had reached her four and twentieth year.  There is not in our
land nor in the land of the Greeks a fairer than she, and her
father feared lest the King take her from him; for she had vowed
herself to the Messiah and rode with Dakianus in the habit of a
cavalier, so that albeit none might compare with her in
loveliness, no one who saw her knew her for a woman.  And her
father had laid up his monies in this hermitage, every one who
had aught of price or treasured hoard being wont to deposit it
therein; and I saw there all manner of gold and silver and jewels
and precious vessels and rarities, none may keep count of them
save Almighty Allah.  Now ye are worthier of these riches than
those Infidels; so lay hands on that which is in the hermitage
and divide it among the Moslems and especially on fighters in the
Holy War.  When these merchants came to Constantinople and sold
their merchandise, that image which is on the wall spoke to them,
by grace of a marvel which Allah granted to me; so they made for
that hermitage and slew Matruhina, after torturing him with most
grievous torments, and dragging him by the beard, till he showed
them the place where I was; when they took me and found no path
but flight for dread of death.  Now tomorrow night Tamasil will
visit that hermitage as is her habit, and her father and his
squires will come after her, as he feareth for her; so, if ye
would witness these things, take me with you and I will deliver
to you the monies and the riches of the Knight Dakianus which be
in that mountain; for I saw them bring out vessels of gold and
silver to drink therefrom, and I heard a damsel of their company
sing to them in Arabic and well-away!  that so sweet a voice
should not be busied in chaunting the Koran.  If, then, ye will;
enter into that hermitage and hide there against the coming of
Dakianus and his daughter; and take her, for she is fit only for
the King of the Age, Sharrkan, or King Zau al-Makan." Thereat
they all rejoiced with the exception of the Wazir Dandan, who put
scant faith in her story, for her words took no hold on his
reason, and signs of doubt in her and disbelief showed in his
face. [FN#429]  Yet he was confounded at her discourse, but he
feared to speak with her for awe of the King.  Then quoth the
ancient dame, Zat al-Dawahi, "Verily, I fear lest the Knight come
and, seeing these troops encamped in the meadow, be afraid to
enter the hermitage." So Zau al-Makan ordered the army to march
upon Constantinople and said, "I have resolved to take with me an
hundred horse and many mules and make for that mountain, where we
will load the beasts with the monies which be in the hermitage."
Then he sent at once for the Chief Chamberlain whom they brought
into the presence; and he summoned likewise the leaders of the
Turks and Daylamites and said, "As soon as it is dawn, do ye set
forth for Constantinople; and thou, O Chamberlain, shalt take my
place in council and contrivance, while thou, O Rustam, shalt be
my brother's deputy in battle.  But let none know that we are not
with you and after three days we will rejoin you." Then he chose
out an hundred of the doughtiest riders, and he and Sharrkan and
the Minister Dandan set out for the hermitage, and the hundred
horsemen led the mules with chests for transporting the
treasure.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

              When it was the Ninety-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sharrkan
and his brother, Zau al-Makan and the Wazir Dandan set off with
an hundred horse for the hermitage described to them by that
accursed Zat al-Dawahi, and they took with them mules and chests
for transporting the treasure.  Now as soon as dawned the morn,
the Chamberlain signalled to the host an order for departure, and
they set out thinking that the two Kings and the Wazir were with
them; knowing not that the three had made for the monastery. 
Such was the case with the host, but as regards the two Kings and
the Minister, they tarried in their place till the end of that
day.  Now the Infidels who were with Zat al-Dawahi took their
departure privily, after they had gone in to her and kissed her
hands and feet and obtained her leave to march.  So she not only
gave them permission but also taught them all she minded of wile
and guile.  And when it was dark night, she arose and went in to
Zau al-Makan and his companions and said to them, "Come, let us
set out for the mountain, and take with you a few men at arms."
They obeyed her and left five horsemen at the foot of the
mountain, whilst the rest rode on before Zat al-Dawahi, who
gained new strength for excess of joy, so that Zau al-Makan said,
"Glory be to Him who sustaineth this holy man, whose like we
never saw!" Now the witch had written a letter to the King of
Constantinople and despatched it on the wings of a bird, [FN#430]
acquainting him with what had passed and ending, "I wish thee to
send me ten thousand horsemen of the bravest of the Greeks and
let them steal along the foot of the mountains with caution, lest
the host of Al-Islam get sight of them; and, when they reach the
hermitage, let them ambush themselves there, till I come to them
with the Moslem King and his brother, for I shall inveigle them
and will bring them thither, together with the Wazir and an
hundred horse and no more, that I may presently deliver to them
the crosses which be in the hermitage.  I am resolved to slay the
Monk Matruhina, since my scheme cannot be carried out but by
taking his life.  If my plot work well, not one of the Moslems
shall return to his own country; no, not a living wight nor one
who blows the fire alight; and Matruhina shall be a sacrifice for
the followers of the Nazarene faith and the servants of the
Cross, and praise be to the Messiah, first and last." When this
letter reached Constantinople, the keeper of the carrier pigeons
carried it to King Afridun, who read it and forthwith inspected
his host and equipped ten thousand cavaliers with horses and
dromedaries and mules and provaunt and bade them repair to that
hermitage and, after reaching the tower, to hide therein.  Thus
far concerning them; but as regards King Zau al-Makan and his
brother Sharrkan and the Wazir Dandan and the escort, when they
reached the hermitage they entered and met the Monk Matruhina,
who came out to see who and what they were; whereupon quoth that
pious man Zat al-Dawahi, "Slay this damned fellow." [FN#431] So
they smote him with their swords and made him drink the cup of
death.  Then the accursed old woman carried them to the place of
offerings and ex votos, and brought out to them treasures and
precious things more than she had described to them; and after
gathering the whole together, they set the booty in chests and
loaded the mules therewith.  As for Tamasil, she came not, she or
her father, for fear of the Moslems; so Zau al-Makan tarried
there, awaiting her all that day and the next and a third, till
Sharrkan said to him, "By Allah, I am troubled anent the army of
Al-Islam, for I know not what is become of them." His brother
replied, "And I also am concerned for them: we have come by this
great treasure and I do not believe that Tamasil or any one else
will approach the hermitage, after that befel which hath befallen
the host of the Christians.  It behoveth us, then, to content
ourselves with what Allah hath given us and depart; so haply He
will help us conquer Constantinople." Accordingly they came down
from the mountain, while Zat al-Dawahi was impotent to oppose
their march for fear of betraying her deceit; and they fared
forwards till they reached the head of a defile, where the old
woman had laid an ambush for them with the ten thousand horse. 
As soon as these saw the Moslems they encircled them from all
sides, couching lance and baring the white sabre blade; and the
Infidels shouted the watch word of their faithless Faith and set
the shafts of their mischief astring.  When Zau al-Makan and his
brother Sharrkan and the Minister Dandan looked upon this host,
they saw that it was a numerous army and said, "Who can have
given these troops information of us?" Replied Sharrkan, "O my
brother, this be no time for talk; this is the time for smiting
with swords and shooting with shafts) so gird up your courage and
hearten your hearts, for this strait is like a street with two
gates; though, by the virtue of the Lord of Arabs and Ajams, were
not the place so narrow I would bring them to naught, even though
they were an hundred thousand men!" Said Zau al-Makan, "Had we
wotted this we would have brought with us five thousand horse;"
and the Wazir Dandan continued, "If we had ten thousand horse
they had availed us naught in these narrows; but Allah will
succour us against them.  I know this defile and its straitness,
and I know there be many places of refuge in it; for I have been
here on razzia with King Omar bin al-Nu'uman, what while we
besieged Constantinople.  We abode in this place, and here is
water colder than snow.  So come, let us push out of this defile
ere the Infidel host increase on us and get the start of us to
the mountain top, whence they will hurl down rocks upon us, and
we powerless to come at them." So they began hurrying on to get
out of those narrows; but the pious man, Zat al-Dawahi, looked at
them and said, "What is it ye fear, ye who have vowed yourselves
to the Lord, and to working His will?  By Allah, I abode
imprisoned underground for fifteen years, yet never gainsaid the
Almighty in aught he did with me!  Fight ye in Allah's way; so
whoever of you is slain Paradise shall be his abode, and whoso
slayeth, his striving shall be to his honour." When they heard
from the ascetic these words, their care and anxiety ceased from
them and they stood firm till the Infidels charged down from all
sides, whilst the swords played upon their necks and the cup of
death went round amongst them.  The Moslems fought for the
service of Allah a right good fight, and wrought upon His foes
with sway of sword and lunge of lance; whilst Zau al-Makan smote
upon the men and garred the knights bite the dust and their heads
from their bodies take flight, five by five and ten by ten, till
he had done to death a number of them past numbering and an
accompt beyond counting.  Now while so doing, he looked at the
accursed old woman who was waving her sword and heartening them,
and all who feared fled to her for shelter; but she was also
signing the Infidels to slay Sharrkan.  So troop after troop
rushed on him with design to do him die; but each troop that
charged, he charged and drove back; and when another troop
attacked him he repelled the assault with the sword in their
backs; for he thought it was the devotee's blessing that gave him
the vic tory, and he said in himself, "Verily on this holy men
Allah looketh with eyes of His favour and strengtheneth my
prowess against the Infidels with the purity of his pious intent:
for I see that they fear me and cannot prevail against me, but
every one who assaileth me turneth tail and taketh flight." So
they battled the rest of the day and, when night fell, the
Moslems took refuge in a cave of that defile being weary with
stress of war and cast of stone: and that day were slain of them
five and forty.  And when they were gathered together, they
sought the devotee, but could find no trace of him; and this was
grievous to them and they said, "Belike, he hath died a martyr."
Quoth Sharrkan, "I saw him heartening the horsemen with divine
instances and using as talisman verses of Holy Writ." Now while
they were talking, behold, the accursed old woman, Zat al-Dawahi,
stood before them, hending in hand the head of the Chief Captain
of the ten thousand horse, a noble knight, a champion fierce in
fight and a Satan for blight.  One of the Turks had slain him
with an arrow, and Allah hurried his soul to the fire; and when
the Infidels saw what that Moslem had done with their leader,
they all fell on him and wrought his bane and hewed him in pieces
with their swords, and Allah hurried his soul to Heaven.  Then
the accursed old woman cut off that Knight's head and brought it
and threw it at the feet of Sharrkan and Zau al-Makan and the
Wazir Dandan.  Now when Sharrkan sew her, he sprang up hastily
before her and exclaimed, "Praised be Allah for thy safety and
for our sighting thee, O holy man and devout champion of the
Religion!" Replied she, O my son, I have sought martyrdom this
day, and have thrown my life away amid the Infidel array, but
they feared me with dismay.  When ye dispersed, I waxed jealous
for your honour; so I rushed on the Chief Knight their leader,
albeit he was a match for a thousand horse, and I smote him till
I severed head from trunk.  Not one of the Infidels could near
me; so I brought his head to you,"--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

             When it was the Ninety-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damned witch, Zat al-Dawahi, took the head of the Knight, the
leader of the twenty thousand Infidels, she brought it and threw
it down before Zau al-Makan and his brother Sharrkan and the
Wazir Dandan, saying, "When I saw your condition, I waxed jealous
for your honour; so I rushed on the Chief Knight and smote him
with the sword till I severed head from trunk.  And none could
near me, so I brought his head to you, that you may be
strengthened in Holy War and work out with your swords the will
of the Lord of the Faithful.  And now I purpose leaving you to
strive against the Infidels, whilst I go to your army, though
they be at the gates of Constantinople, and return with twenty
thousand horse to destroy these Unfaithfuls." Quoth Sharrkan,
"How wilt thou pass to them, O thou holy man, seeing that the
valley is blocked up on all sides by the Miscreants?" Quoth the
accursed hag, "Allah will veil me from their eyes and they shall
not sight me; [FN#432] nor, if any saw me, would he dare to attack
me at that time, for I shall be as one non existing, absorbed in
Allah, and He will fend off from me His foes." "Thou sayest
sooth, O holy man," rejoined Sharrkan, "for indeed I have been
witness of that; so, if thou can pass out at the first of the
night, 'twill be best for us." Replied she, "I will set out at
this very hour and, if thou desire, thou shalt go with me and
none shall see thee.  Furthermore if thy brother also have a mind
to go with us we will take him, but none else; for the shadow of
a saint can cover only twain." Sharrkan said, "As for me I will
not leave my comrades; but, if my brother will, there is no harm
in his going with thee and setting us free of this strait; for he
is the stronghold of the Moslems and the sword of the Lord of the
three Worlds; and if it be his pleasure, let him take with him
the Wazir Dandan, or whom else he may elect and send us ten
thousand horse to succour us against these caitiffs." So after
debate they agreed on this and the old woman said, "Give me
leisure to go before you and consider the condition of the
Infidels, if they be asleep or awake." Quoth they, "We will not
go forth save with thee and trust our affair to Allah." "If I do
your bidding," replied she, "blame me not but blame yourselves;
for it is my rede that you await me till I bring you tidings of
the case." Then said Sharrkan, "Go to them and delay not from us,
for we shall be awaiting thee." Thereupon she fared forth and
Sharrkan turned to his brother addressing him and said, "Were not
this holy man a miracle worker, he had never slain yonder furious
knight.  This is proof sufficient of the ascetic's power; and of
a truth the pride of the Infidels is laid low by the slaying of
this cavalier, for he was violent, an evil devil and a stubborn."
Now whilst they were thus devising of the mighty works of the
devotee, behold, the accursed Zat al-Dawahi came upon them and
promised them victory over the Unbelievers; wherefor they thanked
her (not knowing that all this was wile and guile) and the damned
hag asked, "Where be the King of the Age, Zau al-Makan, and the
Minister Dandan?" Answered he, "Here am I!" Take with thee thy
Wazir," said she, "and follow after me, that we may fare forth to
Constantinople." Now she had acquainted the Infidels with the
cheat she had put upon the Moslems, and they rejoiced with
exceeding great joy, and said, Our hearts will not be contented
till we shall have slain their King in return for the Knight's
death; because we had no stouter rider than he;" and they added
(bespeaking the ill omened hag as she told them her plan of
faring to the land of the Moslems), "When thou bringest him to
us, we will bear him to King Afridun." Then she went out and went
out with her Zau al-Makan and the Minister Dandan, and she walked
on before the two saying, "Fare forth with the blessing of
Almighty Allah!" So they did her bidding, for the shaft of Pate
and Fortune of man's lot had shot them, and she ceased not
leading them both through the midst of the Grecian camp, till
they came to the defile, the narrow pass aforesaid, whilst the
Infidel enemy watched them, but did them no hindrance; for the
infernal old woman had enjoined this.  Now when Zau al-Makan and
the Wazir Dandan saw that the Infidel host offered them no let
and stay and yet had them in sight, the Wazir exclaimed, "By
Allah, this is one of the holy man's saintly miracles!  and
doubtless he be of the elect." Rejoined Zau al-Makan, "By Allah,
I think the Infidels be naught but blind, for we see them and
they see us not." And while they were thus praising the holy man
and recounting his mighty works and his piety and his prayers,
behold, the Infidels charged down on them from all sides and
surrounded them and seized them, saying, "Is there anyone else
with you twain, that we may seize upon him too?" And the Wazir
Dandan replied, "See you not yon other man that is before us?  '
Replied the Unbelievers, "By the truth of the Messiah and the
Monks, and the Primate and the Metropolitan, we see none save you
two!" Then Zau Al-Makan said, "By Allah, this is a chastisement
decreed to us by Almighty Allah!"--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

              When it was the Ninety-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Unfaithful had seized upon King Zau al-Makan and the Wazir
Dandan, they said to the two, "Is there anyone else with you
twain, that we may seize upon him also?" And the Wazir Dandan
replied, "See you not yon other man who be with us?" They
rejoined, "By the truth of the Messiah and the Monks and the
Primate and the Metropolitan, we see none save you two!" Then the
Infidels laid shackles on their feet and set men to guard them
during the night, whilst Zat al-Dawahi fared on and disappeared
from their sight.  So they fell to lamenting and saying to each
other, "Verily, the opposing of pious men leadeth to greater
distress than this, and we are punished by the strait which hath
befallen us." So far concerning Zau al-Makan and the Wazir
Dandan; but as regards King Sharrkan, he passed that night in the
cavern with his comrades, and when dawned the day and he had
prayed the morn prayer, he and his men made ready to do battle
with the Infidel and he heartened them and promised them all
good.  Then they sallied out till they were hard upon the
Unbelievers and, when these saw them from afar, they cried out to
them, saying, "O Moslems, we have taken captives your Sultan and
your Wazir who hath the ordering of your affairs; and except ye
leave off fighting us, we will slay you to the last man; but an
you yield yourselves we will take you to our King, who will make
peace with you on condition that you quit our country and return
home and harm us in naught, and we will do you no harm in aught. 
If ye accept, it will be well for you; but if ye refuse there
remaineth nothing for you but death.  So we have told you sooth,
and this is our last word to you." Now when Sharrkan heard this
and was certified of the captivity of his brother and the Wazir
Dandan, he was weighed down with woe and wept; his force failed
him and, making sure of death, he said to himself, "Would I knew
the cause of their capture!  Did they fail of respect to the holy
man or disobey him, or what was the matter?" Then they sprang up
to battle with the Unbelievers and slew great numbers of them. 
The brave was known that day from craven men, and sword and spear
were dyed with bloody stain; for the Infidels flocked up on them,
as flies flock to drink, from hill and from plain; but Sharrkan
and his men ceased not to wage the fight of those who fear not to
die, nor let death hinder them from the pursuit of victory, till
the valley ran gore and earth was full of the slain she bore. 
And when night fell the armies separated each making for his own
place; and the Moslems returned to the cavern where gain and loss
were manifest to them: few remained of them and there was no
dependence for them but on Allah and the scymitar.  Now there had
been slain of them that day five and thirty men of the chiefest
Emirs, and they had killed thousands of the Infidels, footmen and
fighters on horse.  When Sharrkan saw this, the case was grievous
to him and he asked his comrades "What shall we do?"; whereto all
answered, "That which Almighty Allah willeth shall befal us." On
the morning of the second day, Sharrkan said to the remnant of
his troop, "If ye go forth to fight, not one of you will remain
alive and we have but little left of food and water; so I deem ye
would do better to bare your brands and go forth and stand at the
mouth of this cavern, to hinder any from entering.  Haply the
holy man may have reached the Moslem host, and may return with
ten thousand horses to succour us in fight with the Infidels, for
belike the Unfaithful may have failed to see him and those with
him." They said, This were the better course to take, and of its
expediency no doubt we make." So the troop went out and held the
cavern mouth standing by its walls; and every one of the Infidels
who sought to enter in, they slew.  Thus did they fend off the
foe from the gape of the cave and they patiently supported all
such assaults, till day was done and night came on dusky and
dun;--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

              When it was the Ninety-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the army of
the Moslems held the cavern mouth and stood by its walls and they
fended off the foe, and every one of the Infidels attempted to
charge them, him they slew; and they patiently supported all such
assaults till day was done and night came on dusky and dun, by
which time King Sharrkan had only five and twenty men and no more
left.  Then quoth the Infidels to one another, "When shall these
battle days have an end?  We are weary of warring the Moslems."
And quoth one of them, "Up and at them, for there remain of them
but five and twenty men!  If we cannot prevail on them to fight,
let us light a fire upon them; [FN#433] and if they submit
themselves and yield to us, we will take them prisoners; but if
they refuse we will leave them for fuel to the fire, so shall
they become to men of foreseeing mind a warning dire.  May the
Messiah on their fathers have no grace, and may the sojourn of
the Nazarenes be for them no abiding place!" So they carried fuel
to the jaws of the cavern and set fire to it.  Thereupon Sharrkan
and his companions made sure of perdition and yielded themselves
prisoners.  And while they were in this condition, lo!  the
knight their captain said to those who counselled their
slaughter, "It is not for any save for King Afridun to kill them,
that he may gratify his wrath; therefore it behoveth us to keep
them in durance by us till the morrow, when we will journey with
them to Constantinople and deliver them to our King, who shall
deal with them as he please." Said they, "This is the right
course;" and he commanded to pinion them and set guards over
them.  Then, as soon as it was black night, the Infidels busied
themselves with feasting and making festival; and they called for
wine and drank it till all fell upon their backs.  Now Sharrkan
and his brother, Zau al-Makan, were in confinement and so also
were his companion knights; whereupon the elder turned to the
younger brother and said to him, "O my brother, how win free?"
"By Allah," replied Zau al Makan, "I know not; for here we be
like birds in cage." Then Sharrkan waxed wroth and sighed for
excess of rage and stretched himself, till his pinion bonds brass
asunder; whereupon being free he arose and went up to the Captain
of the guard, and taking from his pocket the keys of the fetters,
freed Zau al-Makan and the Wazir Dandan and the rest of his men. 
Then he turned to the two and said, "I desire to slay three of
these Infidels and take and don their dress, we three; so that we
shall be guised as Greeks and we will pass through them, with out
their knowing us, and fare forth to our own force." Replied Zau
al-Makan, "This is no safe counsel for if we kill them, I fear
some of their comrades may hear their shrieks and the foe be
aroused upon us and kill us.  'Twere the surer way to pass out of
the defile." So they agreed upon this and set out; and, when they
had left the head of the strait a little distance behind, they
saw horses picketed and the riders sleeping: and Sharrkan said to
his brother, "Better we take each one of us a steed." There were
five and twenty horsemen, so they took five and twenty horses,
whilst Allah sent sleep upon the Infidels for a purpose He knew
and the Faithful mounted and fared on till they were out of
reach.  Meanwhile Sharrkan set to gathering from the Infidels as
many weapons, swords, and spears, as were wanted.  And while they
took saddle and struck forwards none of the Infidels supposed
that anyone could release Zau al-Makan and his brother and their
men; or that their prisoners had power to escape.  Now when all
the captives were safe from the Unfaithful, Sharrkan came up with
his comrades, and found them awaiting his arrival, on coals of
flame, expecting him in anxious grame, so he turned to them and
said, "Feel no fear since Allah protecteth us.  I have that to
propose which haply shall effect our purpose." "What is it?"
asked they and he answered, "I desire that ye all climb to the
mountain top and cry out with one voice, 'Allaho Akbar!' and ye
add, 'The army of Al Islam is upon you!  Allaho Akbar!' This wise
their company will surely be dissolved nor will they find out the
trick for they are drunk, but they will think that the Moslem
troops have encompassed them about on all sides and have mingled
with them; so they will fall on one another brand in hand during
the confusion of drunkenness and sleep, and we will cleave them
asunder with their own swords and the scymitar will go round
amongst them till dawn." Replied Zau al-Makan, "This plan is not
good; we should do better to make our way to our army and speak
not a word; for if we cry out 'Allaho Akbar,' they will wake and
fall on us and not one of us will escape." Rejoined Sharrkan, "By
Allah, though they should awake tis no matter, and I long that ye
fall in with my plan, for naught save good can come of it!" So
they agreed thereon and clomb the mountain and shouted, "Allaho
Akbar!" And hills and trees and rocks reworded their Allaho Akbar
for fear of the Almighty.  But when the Kafirs heard this slogan
they cried out to one another,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

              When it was the One Hundredth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sharrkan
spake thus, "I long that ye fall in with this my plan, for naught
save good can come of it." So they agreed thereon and clomb the
mountain head and shouted, "Allaho Akbar!"; and hills and trees
and rocks re worded their Allaho Akbar for fear of the Almighty. 
The Infidels heard it and cried out one to other and donned their
armour and said, "The foe is upon us, by the truth of the
Messiah!" Then they fell on one another and slew of their own men
more than any knoweth save Almighty Allah.  As soon as it was
dawn, they sought for the captives, but found no trace of them,
and their captains said, "They who did this were the prisoners in
our possession; up, then, and after them in all haste till ye
overtake them, when we will make them quaff the cup of requital;
and let not fright nor the panic of sudden awaking possess you."
So they took horse and rode after the fugitives and it wanted but
an eye twinkling before they overtook them and surrounded them. 
Now when Zau al-Makan saw this, he was seized with increase of
terror and said to his brother, "What I feared would come, is
come upon us, and now it remaineth only for us to fight for the
Faith." But Sharrkan preferred to hold his peace.  Then Zau al-
Makan and his companions rushed down from the hill crest,
shouting, "Allaho Akbar!" and his men repeated the war cry and
addressed themselves to fight and to sell their lives in the
service of the Lord of Faithful Men; and while they were in this
case, behold, they heard many voices voicing, "There is no god
but the God!  God is most great!  Salutation and salvation upon
the Apostle, the Bringer of glad Tidings, the Bearer of bad
Tidings!'' [FN#434]  So they turned towards the direction of the
sound and saw a company of Moslems who believed in one God,
pushing towards them, whereat their hearts were heartened and
Sharrkan charged upon the Infidels crying out, "There is no god
but the God!  God is most great! he and those with him, so that
earth quaked as with an earthquake and the Unbeliever host brake
asunder and fled into the mountains and the Moslems followed them
with lunge and blow; and Zau al-Makan and his comrades of the
Moslems ceased not to smite the hosts of the Infidel foe, and
parted heads from bodies till day darkened and night coming on
starkened sight.  Thereupon the Moslems drew together and passed
the night in congratulations, and, when morning dawned and
daybreak shone with its shine and sheen, they saw Bahram, the
captain of the Daylamites, and Rustam, the captain of the Turks,
advancing to join them, with twenty thousand cavaliers like lions
grim.  As soon as they saw Zau al-Makan, the riders dismounted
and saluted him, and kissed ground between his hands when he said
to them, "Rejoice ye in the glad tidings of the victory of the
Moslem and the discomfiture of the tribe of Unbelievers!" Then
they gave one another joy of their deliverance and of the
greatness of their reward after Resurrection Day.  Now the cause
of the coming of the succours to that place was this.  When the
Emir Bahram and the Emir Rustam and the Chief Chamberlain, with
the Moslem host and flags flaunting high ahead, came in sight of
Constantinople they saw that the Nazarenes had mounted the walls
and manned the towers and the forts, and had set all their
defenders in order of defence, as soon as they learned of the
approach of the host of Al-Islam and the banners Mohammedan, and
they heard the clash of arms and the noise of war voices and
tramp of horse hoofs and from their look outs they beheld the
Moslems, with their standards and ensigns of the Faith of Unity
under the dust clouds and lo!  they were like a flight of locusts
or rain clouds raining rain, and the voices of the Moslems
chanting the Koran and glorifying the Compassionate One, struck
their ears.  Now the Infidels knew of the approach of this host
through Zat al-Dawahi with her craft and whoredom, [FN#435]
calumny and contrivance.  And the armies of Al-Islam drew near,
as it were the swollen sea, for the multitude of footmen and
horsemen and women and children.  Then quoth the General of the
Turks to the General of the Daylamites, "O Emir, of a truth, we
are in jeopardy from the multitude of the foe who is on the
walls.  Look at yonder bulwarks and at this world of folk like
the seas that clash with dashing billows.  Indeed yon Infidel
outnumbereth us an hundredfold and we cannot be safe from spies
who may inform them that we are without a Sultan.  In very sooth,
we run danger from these enemies, whose numbers may not be told
and whose resources none can withhold, especially in the absence
of King Zau al-Makan and his brother Sharrkan and the illustrious
Wazir Dandan.  If they know of this, they will be emboldened to
attack us in their absence and with the sword they will
annihilate us to the last man; not one of us safety shall see. 
So it is my counsel that thou take ten thousand riders of the
allies and the Turks, and march them to the hermitage of
Matruhina and the meadow of Malukhina in quest of our brothers
and comrades.  If thou act by my advice, it may be we shall
approve ourselves the cause of their deliverance, in case they be
hard pressed by the Infidels; and if thou act not, blame will not
attach to me.  But, an ye go, it behoveth that ye return quickly,
for ill suspicion is part of prudence." The Emir aforesaid fell
in with his counsel; so they chose twenty thousand horse and they
set out covering the roads and making for the monastery above
mentioned.  So much for the cause of their coming; but as regards
the ancient dame, Zat al-Dawahi, as soon as she had delivered
Sultan Zau al-Makan and his brother Sharrkan and the Wazir Dandan
into the hands of the Infidels, the foul whore mounted a swift
steed, saying to the Faithless, "I design to rejoin the Moslem
army which is at Constantinople and contrive for their
destruction; for I will inform them that their chiefs are dead,
and when they hear that from me, their joining will be disjointed
and the cord of their confederation cut and their host scattered. 
Then will I go to King Afridun, Lord of Constantinople, and to my
son Hardub, King of Roum, and relate to them their tidings and
they will sally forth on the Moslems with their troops and will
destroy them and will not leave one of them alive." So she
mounted and struck across country on her good steed all the
livelong night; and, when day dawned, appeared the armies of
Bahram and Rustam advancing towards her.  So she turned into a
wayside brake and hid her horse among the trees and she walked a
while saying to herself, "Haply the Moslem hosts be returning,
routed, from the assault of Constantinople." However, as she drew
near them she looked narrowly and made sure that their standards
were not reversed, [FN#436] and she knew that they were coming not
as conquered men, but fearing for their King and comrades.  When
she was assured of this, she hastened towards them, running at
speed, like a devil of ill rede, till reaching them she cried
out, "Haste ye!  haste ye!  O soldiers of the Compassionate One,
hasten to the Holy War against the hosts of Satan!" When Bahram
saw her he dismounted and kissed the ground before her and asked
her, "O friend of Allah what is behind thee?" Answered she,
"Question not of sad case and sore condition; for when our
comrades had taken the treasure from the hermitage of Matruhina,
and designed to win their way Constantinople wards, thereupon
came out on them a driving host and a dreadful of the Infidels."
And the damned witch repeated to them the story to fill them with
trouble and terror, adding, "The most of them are dead, and there
are but five and twenty men left." Said Bahram, "O holy man! 
when didst thou leave them?" "But this night," [FN#437] replied
she.  He cried, "Glory be to Allah!  to Him who hath rolled up
the far distance for thee like a rug, so that thou hast sped thus
walking upon thy feet and props upon a mid-rib of palm-tree!  But
thou art one of the saints which fly like birds when inspired and
possessed by His directions." [FN#438]  Then he mounted his horse,
and he was perplexed and confounded by what he had heard from the
beldam so strong in lies and ill calumnies, and he said, "There
is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious,
the Great!  Verily our labour is lost and our hearts are heavy
within us, for our Sultan is a prisoner and those who are with
him." Then they cut across the country, wide and side, night and
day, and when morning dawned they reached the head of the defile
and saw Zau al-Makan and Sharrkan shouting.  "There is no god but
the God!  Allaho Akbar!  and Salutation and Salvation upon the
Congratulator, the Comminator." [FN#439]  Whereupon he and his
drove at the Unbelievers and whelmed them, as the rain torrent
whelms the waste; and cried out their war cries, till fear get
hold of the prowess Knights and the mountains were cloven in
affright.  And when shone the day and showed its shine and sheen,
the breeze of morning blew upon them sweet and fragrant, and each
recognised other as hath been said before.  Then they kissed the
ground before the King and before his brother Sharrkan, who told
them all that had befallen the party in the cave.  Now thereat
they marvelled and said to one another, "Hasten we back to
Constantinople, for we left our companions there, and our hearts
are with them." So they hurried departure, commending themselves
to the Subtle, the All-wise, and Zau al-Makan exhorted the
Moslems to steadfast- ness and versified in the following
couplets, [FN#440]

"Be praises mine to all praiseworthy Thee, * O Lord, who stinted
     not mine aid to be!
Though was I lost abroad, Thou west to me * Strongest support
     which vouchsafed victory:
Thou gav'st me wealth and reign and goodly gifts, * And slungest
     con quering sword of valiancy:
Thou mad'st me blest beneath Thy kingly shade, * Engraced with
     generous boons dealt fain and free:
Thou savedst *from every fear I feared, by aid * Of my Wazir, the
     Age's noblest he!
Garred us Thy grace in fight to throw the Greek, * Who yet came
     back dight in War's cramoisie:
Then made I feint to fly from out the fight; * But like grim lion
     turning made them flee,
And left on valley sole my foemen, drunk * Not with old
     wine [FN#441] but Death-cup's revelry:
Then came the Saintly Hermit, and he showed * His marvels wrought
     for town and wold to see;
When slew they hero-wights who woke to dwell * In Eden bowers
     wherein sweet rill-lets well."

But, when Zau al-Makan had made an end of versifying, his brother
Sharrkan congratulated him on his safety and thanked him for the
deeds he had done; after which both set out forcing their marches
to rejoin their army.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

          When it was the One Hundred and First Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Sharrkan
congratulated his brother, Zau al-Makan, on his safety and
thanked him for the deeds he had done; after which both set out
forcing their marches to rejoin their army.  Such was their case;
but as regards the old woman, Zat al-Dawahi, after she had
foregathered with the hosts of Rustam and Bahram, she returned to
the coppice, where she took her steed and mounted and sped on at
speed, till she drew near the Moslem army that beleaguered
Constantinople, when she lighted down from her destrier and led
it to the pavilion tent of the Chief Chamberlain.  And when he
saw her, he stood up to her in honour and signed to her with his
right hand and said, "Welcome O pious recluse!" Then he
questioned her of what had befallen, and she repeated to him her
disquieting lies and deluding calumnies, saying, "In sooth I fear
for the Emir Rustam, and the Emir Bahram, for that I met them and
theirs on the way and sent them and their following to relieve
the King and his companions.  Now there are but twenty thousand
horse and the Unbelievers outnumber them; so I would have thee at
this moment send off the rest of thy troops at full speed to
their suc cour, lest they be slain to the last man." And she
cried to them, "Haste!  Haste!" When the Chamberlain and the
Moslems heard these words, their spirits fell and they wept; but
Zat al-Dawahi said to them, "Ask aidance of Allah and bear
patiently this triburation; for ye have the example of those who
have been before you of the people of Mohammed; and Paradise with
its palaces is laid out by Allah for those who die martyrs; and
needs must all die, but most praiseworthy is dying while fighting
for the Faith." The Chamberlain, hearing this speech of the
accursed old woman, called for the Emir Bahram's brother, a
knight by name Tarkash; and, choosing out for him ten thousand
horse, riders famed for force, bade him set out at once.  So he
fared forth and marched all that day and the whole of the next
night, till he neared the Moslems.  When daylight dawned,
Sharrkan saw the dust cloud about them and feared for the men of
Al-Islam and said, "If these troops which are coming upon us be
Moslem men our victory is assured by them; but, if these be
Nazarenes, there is no gainsaying Destiny's decrees." Then he
turned to his brother, Zau al- Makan, and said, Never fear, for
with my life I will ransom thee from death.  If these be
Mohammedan troops, then were it an increase of heavenly favours;
but, if they be our foes, there is no help save that we fight
them.  Yet do I long to meet the Holy Man ere I die, so I may beg
him to pray that I die not save by death of martyrdom." Whilst
the twain were thus speaking, behold, there appeared the banners
inscribed with the words, "There is no god but the God and
Mohammed is the Apostle of God;" and Sharrkan cried out, "How is
it with the Moslems?" "All are sound and safe," replied they,
"and we came not but out of concern for you." Then the Chief of
the army dismounted and, kissing ground before Sharrkan, asked,
"O my lord, how be the Sultan and the Wazir Dandan and Rustam and
my brother Bahram; are they all in safety?" He answered, "All
well; but who brought thee tidings of us?" Quoth Tarkash; "It was
the Holy Man who told us that he had met my brother Bahram and
Rustam and had sent them both to you and he also assured us that
the Infidels had encompassed you and out numbered you; but I see
not the case save the contrary thereof and that you are
victorious." They questioned him, "And how did the Holy Man reach
you?"; and he replied, "Walking on his feet and he had compassed
in a day and a night, ten days' journey for a well girt
horseman." "There is no doubt but that he is a Saint of Allah,"
said Sharrkan, "but where is he now?" They rejoined, "We left him
with our troops, the folk of the Faith, moving them to do battle
with the rebels and the Faithless." Thereat Sharrkan rejoiced and
all thanked Allah for their own deliverance and the safety of the
Holy Man; and commended the dead to His mercy saying, "This was
writ in the Book." Then they set out making for Constantinople by
forced marches, and whilst they were on this enterprise, behold,
a dust cloud arose to such height that it walled the two
horizons, the eastern and the western, from man's sight and the
day was darkened by it to night.  But Sharrkan looked at it and
said, "Verily, I fear lest this be the Infidels who have routed
the army of Al-Islam for that this dust walleth the world, east
and west, and hideth the two horizons, north and south."
Presently appeared under the dust a pillar of darkness, blacker
than the blackness of dismal days; nor ceased to come upon them
that column more dreadful than the dread of the Day of Doom. 
Horse and foot hastened up to look at it and know the terrors of
the case, when behold, they saw it to be the recluse aforesaid;
so they thronged round him to kiss his hands and he cried out, "O
people of the Best of Mankind, [FN#442] the lamp which shineth in
darkness blind, verily the Infidels have outwitted the Moslems by
guile, for they fell upon the host of the One God whilst they
deemed themselves safe from the Faithless, and attacked them in
their tents and made a sore slaughter of them what while they
looked for no wile; so hasten to the aid of the Believers in the
unity of God, and deliver them from those who deny Him!" Now when
Sharrkan heard these words, his heart flew from his breast with
sore trouble; and, alighting from his steed in amazement, he
kissed the Recluse's hands and feet.  On like wise did his
brother, Zau al-Makan, and the rest of the foot and horse troops;
except the Wazir Dandan, who dismounted not but said, "By Allah,
my heart flieth from this devotee, for I never knew show of
devotion to religion that bred not bane.  So leave him and rejoin
your comrades the Moslems, for this man is of the outcasts from
the gate of the mercy of the Lord of the Three Worlds!  How often
have I here made razzias with King Omar bin al-Nu'uman and
trodden the earth of these lands!" Said Sharrkan, "Put away from
thee such evil thought, hast thou not seen this Holy Man exciting
the Faithful to fight, and holding spears and swords light?  So
slander him not, for backbiting is blameable and poisoned is the
flesh of the pious. [FN#443]  Look how he inciteth us to fight the
foe; and, did not Almighty Allah love him, He had cast him
aforetime into fearful torment." Then Sharrkan bade bring a
Nubian mule for the ascetic to ride and said, "Mount, O pious
man, devout and virtuous!" But the devotee refused to ride and
feigned self denial, that he might attain his end; and they knew
not that this holy personage was like him of whom the poet saith,

"He prayeth and he fasteth for an end he doth espy; * When once
     his end is safely won then fast and prayer good
     bye." [FN#444]

So the devotee ceased not to walk among the horsemen and the
footmen, like a wily fox meditating guile, and began to uplift
her voice, chanting the Koran and praising the Compassionate One. 
And they continued pressing forward till they approached the camp
of Al-Islam, where Sharrkan found the Moslem in conquered plight
and the Chamberlain upon the brink of falling back in flight,
whilst the sword of Greece havoc dight among the Faithful, the
righteous and those who work upright,--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

         When it was the One Hundred and Second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Sharrkan saw the Moslems in conquered plight and the Chamberlain
upon the brink of retreat and flight and the sword havoc dight
among the righteous and the workers of upright, the cause of this
weakness among the Moslems was that the accursed old woman, Zat
al- Dawahi, the foe of the Faith, after seeing that Bahram and
Rustam had set forward with their troops to join Sharrkan and his
brother Zau al-Makan, repaired to the camp of the Mahometans
before Constantinople and caused the mission of the Emir Tarkash,
as hath been before said.  In this her purpose was to divide the
Moslem forces the better to weaken them.  Then she left them and
entered Constantinople, and called with a loud voice on the
knights of the Greeks, saying, "Let me down a cord that I may tie
thereto this letter, and do ye bear it to your King Afridun, that
he may read it and to my son King Hardub that they both do what
is written therein of bidding and forbidding." So they let down
for her a string and she tied thereto a letter whose purport was
the following: "From the terriblest of tribulations [FN#445] and
the chiefest of all calamities, Zat al-Dawahi, to King Afridun
greeting.  But afterwards, of a truth I have contrived a device
for destroying the Moslems; so bide ye quiet and content.  I have
cozened and captured their Sultan and the Wazir Dandan; and then
I returned to their camp and acquainted them therewith, whereby
their pride had a fall and their withers were wrung.  And I have
so wrought upon the host 'leaguering Constantinople that they
have sent ten thousand men under the Emir Tarkash to succour the
capitves, of whom there be now left but few; it is therefore my
object that ye sally forth against them with all your power while
this day endureth; and that ye fall on them in their tents and
that ye leave them not till ye shall have slain them to the last
man; for, verily the Messiah looketh down upon you and the
Blessed Virgin favoureth you; and I hope of the Messiah that he
forget not what deed I have done." When her letter came to King
Afridun, he rejoiced with great joyance; and, sending at once for
King Hardub of Greece, son of Zat al-Dawahi, read the letter to
him as soon as he came,whereathe was exceeding glad and said,
"See my mother's craft; verily it dispenseth with swords, and her
aspect standeth in stead of the terrors of the Day of Dread."
Rejoined Afridun, "May the Messiah not bereave us of thy
venerable parent nor deprive her of her wile and guile!" Then he
bade the Knights give orders for sallying outside the city, and
the news was noised abroad in Constantinople.  So the Nazarenes
and the cohorts of the Cross burst forth and unsheathed their
keen sabres in their numbers, shouting out their professions of
impiety and heresies, and blaspheming the Lord of all Creatures. 
When the Chamberlain saw the sally, he said, "Behold, the Greek
is upon us and they surely have learned that our Sultan is far
away; and haply they have attacked us, for that the most part of
our troops have marched to the succour of King Zau al-Makan!"
Therewith he waxed wroth and cried out, "Ho, soldiers of Al-Islam
and favourers of the True Faith, an you flee you are lost, but if
ye stand fast, ye win!  Know ye that valiancy lieth in endurance
of outrance and that no case is so strait but that the Almighty
is able to make it straight; Allah assain you and look upon you
with eyes of compassion fain!" Thereupon the Moslems cried out,
"Allaho Akbar!" and the believer in the One God shouted his
slogan, and whirled the mill wheels of fight with cutting and
thrusting in main and might; scymitars and spears played sore and
the plains and valleys were swamped with gore.  The priests and
monks priested it, tight girding their girdles and uplifting the
Crucifixes, while the Moslem shouted out the professions of the
Requiting King and verses of the Koran began to sing.  The hosts
of the Compassion are One fought against the legions of Satan;
and head flew from body of man, while the good Angels hovered
above the people of the Chosen Prophet, nor did the sword cease
to smite till the day darkened and night came on and starkened. 
Now the miscreants had encompassed the Moslems and made sure of
escaping the pains that awaited them; and the Faithless greeded
for victory over the Faithful until day dawned and dazzled. 
There upon the Chamberlain mounted, he and his men, trusting thee
Allah would help them to victory; and host was mingled with host
and battle rose a foot and took post.  And heads flew from trunks
whilst the brave stood fast in stead; the craven turned tail and
fled; and the Judge of death judged and sentence sped, so that
the champions fell from their saddles slain and corpses cumbered
meadow and plain.  Then the Moslem began to give ground and
rearwards bent; and the Greek took possession of some of their
tents; whereupon the Moslems were about to break and retreat and
take flight, when meanwhile behold, up came Sharrkan with the
rest of the host of Al-Islam and the standards of the Believers
in Unity.  And having come up with them, he charged the Infidels;
and followed him Zau al-Makan and the Wazir Dandan and the Emirs
Bahram and Rustam with his brother Tarkash.  When the foe saw
this, they lost head and their reason fled, and the dust clouds
towered till they covered the country whilst the righteous
Believers joined their pious comrades.  Then Sharrkan accosted
the Chamberlain and praised him for his steadfastness; and he in
turn gave the Prince joy of his timely succour and his gaining
the day.  Thereat the Moslems were glad and their hearts were
heartened; so they rushed upon their enemies and devoted
themselves to Allah in their Fight for the Faith.  But when the
Idolaters beheld the standards Mohammedan and there on the
profession of Faith Islamitan, proclaiming the Unity, they
shrieked "Woe!" and "Ruin!" and besought succour of the
Patriarchs of the Monasteries.  Then fell they to calling upon
John and Mary and the Cross abhorrent and stayed their hands from
slaughter, whilst King Afridun went up to consult King Hardub of
Greece, for the two Kings stood one at the head of each wing,
right and left.  Now there was with them also a famous cavalier,
Lawiya highs, who commanded the centre; and they drew out in
battle array, but indeed they were full of alarm and affray. 
Meanwhile, the Moslems aligned their forces and thereupon
Sharrkan came to his brother, Zau al-Makan, and said, "O King of
the Age, doubtless they mean to champion it, and that is also the
object of our desire; but it is my wish to push forward the
stoutest hearted of our fighters, for by forethought is one half
of life wrought." Replied the Sultan, "As thou wilt, O companion
of good counsel!" "It is my wish," added Sharrkan, "to stand in
mid line opposite the Infidel, with the Wazir Dandan on my left
and thee on my right, whilst the Emir Bahram leads the dexter
wing and the Emir Rustam leads the wing sinistral; and thou, O
mighty King, shalt be under the standards and the ensigns, for
that thou art the pillar of our defence; upon thee, after Allah,
is our dependence and we will all be thy ransom from aught that
can harm thee."  Zau al-Makan thanked him therefor, and the
slogan arose and the sabre was drawn; but, as things stood thus,
behold, there came forth a cavalier from the ranks of Roum; and,
as he drew near, they saw that he was mounted on a slow paced she
mule, fleeing with her master from the shock of swords.  Her
housings were of white silk covered by a prayer-carpet of Cash
mere stuff, and on her back sat a Shaykh, an old man of comely
presence and reverend aspect, garbed in a gown of white wool.  He
stinted not pushing her and hurrying her on till he came near the
Moslem and said, "I am an ambassador to you all, and an
ambassador hath naught to do save to deliver; so give me safe
conduct and permit of speech, that I communicate to you my
message." Replied Sharrkan, "Thou art in safety: fear neither
sway of sword nor lunge of lance." Thereupon the old man
dismounted and, taking the Cross from his neck, placed it before
the Sultan and humbled himself with much humility.  Then quoth to
him the Moslems, "What is with thee of news?"; and quoth he, "I
am an ambassador from King Afridun, for I counselled him to avert
the destruction of all these frames of men and temples of the
Compassionate One; and to him it seemed righteous to stay the
shedding of blood and limit it to the encounter of two knights in
shock of fight singular; so he agreed to that and he saith to
you, 'Verily, I will ransom my army with my life; so let the
Moslem King do as I do and with his life ransom his host.  And if
he kill me, there will be no stay left in the army of Roum, and
if I kill him, there will be no stability with the Moslems." When
Sharrkan heard this he said, "O monk, I agree to that, for it is
just nor may it be gainsaid; and behold, I will meet him in
duello and do with him derring do, for I am Champion of the
Faithful even as he is Champion of the Faithless; and if he slay
me, he will have won the day and naught will remain for the
Moslems forces save flight.  So return to him, O thou monk, and
say that the single combat shall take place to morrow, for this
day we have come off our journey and are aweary; but after rest
neither reproach nor blame fear ye." So the monk returned (and he
rejoicing) to King Afridun and King Hardub, and told them both
what Sharrkan had said, whereat King Afridun was glad with
exceeding gladness and fell from him anxiety and sadness, and he
said to himself, "No doubt but this Sharrkan is their doughtiest
swayer of the sword and the dourest at lunge of lance; and when I
shall have slain him, their hearts will be disheartened and their
strength will be shattered." Now Zat al-Dawahi had written to
King Afridun of that and had told him how Sharrkan was a Knight
of the Braves and the bravest of knights and had warned him
against him; but Afridun was a stalwart cavalier who fought in
many a fashion; he could hurl rocks and throw spears and smite
with the iron mace and he feared not the prowess of the prow.  So
when he heard the report of the monk that Sharrkan agreed to the
duello, he was like to fly for exceeding joy because he had self
confidence and he knew that none could with stand him.  The
Infidels passed that night in joy and jubilee and wine bibbing;
and, as soon as it was dawn, the two armies drew out with the
swart of spear and the blanch of blade.  And behold a cavalier
rode single handed into the plain, mounted on a steed of purest
strain, and for foray and fray full ready and fain.  And that
Knight had limbs of might and he was clad in an iron cuirass made
for stress of fight.  On his breast he wore a jewelled mirror and
in his hand he bore a keen scymitar and his lance of Khalanj
wood, [FN#446] the curious work of the Frank, weighing a quintal. 
Then the rider uncovered his face and cried out, saying, "Whoso
knoweth me verily hath enough of me, and whoso knoweth me not
right soon [FN#447] shall ken who I be.  I am Afridun the
overwhelmed by the well omened Shawahi, [FN#448] Zat al-Dawahi."
But he had not ended speaking ere Sharrkan, the Champion of the
Moslems, fared forth to meet him, mounted on a sorrel horse worth
a thousand pieces of red gold with accoutrements purfled in
pearls and precious stone; and he bore in baldrick a blade of
watered Indian steel that through necks shore and made easy the
hard and sore.  He crave his charger between the two hosts in
line whilst the horsemen all fixed on him their eyne, and he
cried out to Afridun, "Woe to thee, O accursed!  dost thou deem
me one of the horsemen thou hast overta'en who cannot stand
against thee on battle plain?" Then each rushed upon other and
they bashed together like two mountains crashing or two billows
dash ing and clashing: they advanced and retreated; and drew
together and withdrew; and stinted not of fray and fight and
weapon play, and strife and stay, with stroke of sword and lunge
of lance.  Of the two armies looking on, some said, "Sharrkan is
victor!" and others, "Afridun will conquer!"; and the two riders
stayed not their hands from the hustle until ceased the clamour
and the bustle; and the dust columns rose and the day waned and
the sun waxed yellow and wan.  Then cried out King Afridun to
Sharrkan, saying, "By the truth of the Messiah and the Faith
which is no liar, thou art nought save a doughty rider and a
stalwart fighter; but thou art fraudful and thy nature is not
that of the noble.  I ken thy work is other than praiseworthy nor
is thy prowess that of a Prince; for thy people behave to thee as
though thou wert a slave; [FN#449] and see!  they bring thee out a
charger which is not thine, that thou mayst mount and return to
the fight.  But by the truth of my Faith, thy fighting irketh and
fatigueth me and I am weary of cutting and thrusting with thee;
and if thou purpose to lay on load with me to night, thou wouldst
not change aught of thy harness nor thy horse, till thou approve
to the cavaliers, thy generous blood and skill in brunt." When
Sharrkan heard him say these words concerning his own folk
behaving to him though he were a slave, he waxt wroth and turned
towards his men, meaning to sign to them and bid them not prepare
him change of harness or horse, when lo!  Afridun shook his throw
spear high in air and cast it at Sharrkan.  Now when the Moslem
turned his back, he found none of the men near him, and he knew
this to be a trick of the accursed Infidel; so he wheeled round
in haste and behold, the javelin came at him, so he swerved from
it, till his head was bent low as his saddle bow.  The weapon
grazed his breast, and pierced the skin of his chest, for
Sharrkan was high bosomed: whereupon he gave one cry and swooned
away.  Thereat the accursed Afridun was joyful, thinking he had
slain him; and shouted to the Infidels bidding them rejoice,
whereat the Faithless were encouraged and the Faithful wept. 
When Zau al-Makan saw his brother reeling in selle so that he
well nigh fell, he despatched cavaliers towards him and the
braves hurried to his aid and came up with him.  Thereupon the
Infidels drove at the Moslems; the two hosts joined battle and
the two lines were mingled, whilst the keen scymitar of Al-Yaman
did good work.  Now the first to reach Sharrkan was the Wazir
Dandan,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

          When it was the One Hundred and Third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King
Zau al-Makan saw that the accursed Infidel had struck with
javelin his brother Sharrkan, he deemed him dead, and despatched
cavaliers towards him; and the first to reach him were the Wazir
Dandan and the Emir of the Turks, Bahram, and the Emir of the
Daylamites, Rustam.  They found him falling from his horse; so
they stayed him in his saddle and returned with him to his
brother, Zau al-Makan; then they gave him in charge to his pages,
and went again to do the work of cut and thrust.  So the strife
redoubled and the weapons together clashed and ceased not bate
and debate and naught was to be seen but blood flowing and necks
bowing; nor did the swords cease on the napes of men to make play
nor the strife to rage with more and more affray, till the most
part of the night was past away and the two hosts were aweary of
the mellay.  So they called a truce and each army returned to its
tents, whilst all the Infidels repaired to King Afridun and
kissed the ground before him, and the priests and monks wished
him joy of his victory over Sharrkan.  Then the King fared for
Constantinople and sat upon the throne of his realm, when King
Hardub came to him and said, "May the Messiah strengthen thy fore
arm and never cease to be thy helper and hearken to what prayers
my pious mother, Zat al-Dawahi, shall pray for thee!  Know that
the Moslems can make no stay without Sharrkan." Replied Afridun,
"To morrow shall end the affair when to fight I fare: I will seek
Zau al-Makan and slay him, and their army shall turn tail and of
flight shall avail." Such was the case with the Kafirs; but as
regards the host of Al-Islam, when Zau al-Makan returned to his
tent, he thought of naught but his brother and, going into the
pavilion, found him in evil case and sore condition; whereupon he
summoned for counsel the Wazir Dandan and Rustam and Bahram. 
When they entered, they opined to assemble the physicians that
they might medicine Sharrkan, and they wept and said, "The world
will not readily afford his like!" and they watched by him all
that night, and about the later hours came to them the Recluse in
tears.  When Zau al-Makan saw him, he rose in honour; and the
Religious stroked Sharrkan's wound with his hand, chanting
somewhat of the Koran and repeating by way of talisman some of
the verses of the Compassionate One.  And the pretender ceased
not to watch over him till dawn, when he came to himself and,
opening his eyes, moved his tongue in his mouth and spake.  At
this Zau al-Makan rejoiced, saying, "Of a truth the blessing of
the Holy Man hath taken effect on him!" And Sharrkan said,
"Praised be Allah for recovery; indeed, I am well at this hour. 
That accursed one played me false; and, but that I swerved aside
lighter than lightening, the throw spear had pierced through my
breast.  So praised be Allah for saving me!  And how is it with
the Moslems?" Answered Zau al-Makan, "All are weeping for thee."
Quoth Sharrkan, "I am well and in good case; but where is the
Holy Man?" Now he was sitting by him and said, "At thy head." So
the Prince turned to him and kissed his hand when he said, "O my
son!  Be of good patience and Allah shall increase thy reward;
for the wage is measured by the work." Sharrkan rejoined, "Pray
for me," and he prayed for him.  As soon as morning dawned and
day brake in shine and sheen, the Moslems sallied out to the
plain and the Kafirs made ready to thrust and cut.  Then the
Islamite host advanced and offered fight with weapons ready
dight, and King Zau al-Makan and Afridun made to charge one at
other.  But when Zau al-Makan fared forth into the field, there
came with him the Wazir Dandan and the Chamberlain and Bahram,
saying, "We will be thy sacrifice." He replied, "By the Holy
House and Zemzem and the Place! [FN#450]  I will not be stayed
from going forth against these wild asses." And when he rode out
into the field he played with sword and spear till riders
marvelled and both armies wondered; then he rushed upon the foe's
right wing and of it slew two knights and in like manner he dealt
with the left wing.  Presently he stayed his steed in the midst
of the field and cried out, "Where is Afridun, that I may make
him taste the cup of disgrace?" But when King Hardub saw the case
he conjured Afridun not to attack him, saying, "O King, yesterday
it was thy turn to fight: it is mine to day.  I care naught for
his prowess." So he rushed out towards Zau al-Makan brand in hand
and under him a stallion like Abjar, which was Antar's charger
and its coat was jet black even as saith the poet,

"On the glancing racer outracing glance * He speeds, as though he
     would collar Doom:
His steed's black coat is of darkest jet, * And likest Night in
     her nightliest gloom:
Whose neigh sounds glad to the hearer's ears * Like thunders
     rolling in thun d'rous boom:
If he race the wind he will lead the way, * And the lightning
     flash will behind him loom.'' [FN#451]

Then each rushed upon the opponent, parrying blows and proving
the marvellous qualities were stored in him; and they fell to
drawing on and withdrawing till the breasts of the bystanders
were straitened and they were weary of waiting for the event.  At
last Zau al-Makan cried out his war cry and rushed upon Hardub,
King of Caesarea, [FN#452] and struck him a stroke that shore head
from trunk and slew him on the spot.  When the Infidels saw this,
they charged in a body, compact and united, upon Zau al-Makan,
who met them amidfield, and they engaged in hewing and foining,
till blood ran in rills.  Then the Moslems cried out, "Allaho
Akbar!" (God is most Great) and "There is no god but the God!",
and invoked salvation for the Prophet, the Bringer of Glad
Tidings, the Bearer of Bad Tidings.  And there befel a great
fight, but Allah assigned victory to the Faithful and defeat to
the Faithless.  The Wazir Dandan shouted, "Take your blood
revenge for King Omar bin al Nu'uman and his son Sharrkan!"; and
bared his head and cried out to the Turks.  Now there were by his
side more than twenty thousand horse, and all charged with him as
men, when the Faithless found naught to save their lives but
flight.  So they turned tail to fly while the biting sabre
wrought its havoc and the Moslems slew of them that day some
fifty thousand horse and took more than that number: much folk
also were slain while going in at the gates, for the flock was
great.  Then the Greeks hove to the doors and swarmed up the
walls to await the assault; and in fine the Moslem hosts returned
to their tents aided to glory and victory, and King Zau al-Makan
went in to his brother whom he found in most joyous case.  So he
made a prostration of thanks to the Bountiful and the Exalted;
and then he came forward and gave Sharrkan joy of his recovery. 
Answered he, "Verily we are all under the benediction of this
Religious, holy and righteous, nor would you have been
victorious, but for his accepted orisons; indeed all day he
remained at prayer to invoke victory on the Moslems."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

         When it was the One Hundred and Fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Zau
al- Makan went in to his brother Sharrkan, he found him sitting
with the Holy Man by his side; so he rejoiced and drew near him
and gave him joy of his recovery.  Answered he, "Verily we are
all under the benediction of this Recluse nor would you have been
victorious but for his prayers, indeed he felt no fear this day
and he ceased not supplication for the Moslems.  I found strength
return to me, when I heard your 'Allaho Akbar,' for then I knew
you to be victorious over your enemies.  But now recount to me, O
my brother, what befel thee." So he told him all that had passed
between him and the accursed Hardub and related how he had slain
him and sent him to the malediction of Allah; and Sharrkan
praised him and thanked him for his prowess.  When Zat al-Dawahi
heard tell of her son's death (and she still drest as a devotee),
her face waxed yellow and her eyes ran over with railing tears:
she kept her counsel, however, and feigned to the Moslems that
she was glad and wept for excess of joy.  But she said to
herself, "By the truth of the Messiah, there remaineth no profit
of my life, if I burn not his heart for his brother, Sharrkan,
even as he hath burned my heart for King Hardub, the mainstay of
Christendom and the hosts of Crossdom!" Still she kept her
secret.  And the Wazir Dandan and King Zau al-Makan and the
Chamberlain remained sitting with Sharrkan till they had dressed
and salved his wound; after which they gave him medicines and he
began to recover strength; whereat they joyed with exceeding joy
and told the troops who congratulated themselves, saying, "To
morrow he will ride with us and do manly devoir in the siege."
Then said Sharrkan to them, "Ye have fought through all this day
and are aweary of fight; so it behoveth that you return to your
places and sleep and not sit up." They accepted his counsel and
then each went away to his own pavilion, and none remained with
Sharrkan but a few servants and the old woman Zat al-Dawahi.  He
talked with her through part of the night, then he stretched
himself to rest: and his servants did likewise and presently
sleep overcame them all and they lay like the dead.  Such was the
case with Sharrkan and his men; but as regards the old woman she
alone abode awake while they slumbered in the tent and, looking
at Sharrkan she presently saw that he was drowned in sleep. 
Thereupon she sprang to her feet, as she were a scald she bear or
a speckled snake, and drew from her waist cloth a dagger so
poisoned that if laid thereon it would have melted a rock.  Then
she unsheathed the poniard and went up to Sharrkan's head and she
drew the knife across his throat and severed his weasand and
hewed off his head from his body.  And once more she sprang to
her feet; and, going the round of the sleeping servants, she cut
off their heads also, lest they should awake.  Then she left the
tent and made for the Sultan's pavilion, but finding the guards
on the alert, turned to that of the Wazir Dandan.  Now she found
him reading the Koran and when his sight fell upon her he said,
"Welcome to the Holy Man!" Hearing this from the Wazir, her heart
trembled and she said, "The reason of my coming hither at this
time is that I heard the voice of a saint amongst Allah's Saints
and am going to him." Then she turned her back, but the Wazir
said to himself, "By Allah, I will follow our Devotee this
night!" So he rose and walked after her; but when the accursed
old woman sensed his footsteps, she knew that he was following
her: wherefore she feared the disgrace of discovery and said in
herself, "Unless I serve some trick upon him he will disgrace
me." So she turned and said to him from afar, "Ho, thou Wazir, I
am going in search of this Saint that I may learn who he is; and,
after learning this much, I will ask his leave for thee to visit
him.  Then I will come back and tell thee: for I fear thine
accompanying me, without having his permission, lest he take
umbrage at me seeing thee in my society." Now when the Wazir
heard these words, he was ashamed to answer her; so he left her
and returned to his tent, and would have slept; but sleep was not
favourable to him and the world seemed heaped upon him. 
Presently he rose and went forth from the tent saying in himself,
"I will go to Sharrkan and chat with him till morning." But when
he entered into Sharrkan's pavilion, he found the blood running
like an aqueduct and saw the servants lying with their throats
cut like beasts for food.  At this he cried a cry which aroused
all who were asleep; the folk hastened to him and, seeing the
blood streaming, set up a clamour of weeping and wailing.  Then
the noise awoke the Sultan, who enquired what was the matter, and
it was said to him, "Sharrkan thy brother and his servants are
murthered." So he rose in haste and entered the tent, and found
the Wazir Dandan shrieking aloud and he saw his brother's body
without a head.  Thereat he swooned away and all the troops
crowded around him, weeping and crying out, and so remained for a
while, till he came to himself, when he looked at Sharrkan and
wept with sore weeping, while the Wazir and Rustam and Bahram did
the like.  But the Chamberlain cried and lamented more than the
rest and asked leave to absent himself, such was his alarm.  Then
said Zau al-Makan, "Know ye who did this deed and how is it I see
not the Devotee, him who the things of this world hath put away?"
Quoth the Wazir, "And who should have been the cause of this
affliction, save that Devotee, that Satan?  By Allah, my heart
abhorred him from the first, because I know that all who pretend
to be absorbed in practices religious are vile and treacherous!"
And he repeated to the King the tale of how he would have
followed the Religious, but he forbade him, whereupon the folk
broke out into a tumult of weeping and lamentation and humbled
themselves before Him who is ever near, Him who ever answereth
prayer, supplicating that He would cause the false Devotee who
denied Allah's testimony to fall into their hands.  Then they
laid Sharrken out and buried him in the mountain aforesaid and
mourned over his far-famed virtues.--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

          When it was the One Hundred and Fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that they laid
Sharrkan out and buried him in the mountain aforesaid and mourned
over his far-famed virtues.  Then they looked for the opening of
the city gate; but it opened not and no sign of men appeared to
them on the walls; whereat they wondered with exceeding wonder. 
But King Zau al-Makan said, "By Allah, I will not turn back from
them, though I sit here for years and years, till I take blood
revenge for my brother Sharrkan and waste Constantinople and kill
the King of the Nazarenes, even if death overcome me and I be at
rest from this woeful world!" Then he bade be brought out the
treasure taken from the Monastery of Matruhina; and mustered the
troops and divided the monies among them, and he left not one of
them but he gave him gifts which contented him.  Moreover, he
assembled in the presence three hundred horse of every division
and said to them, "Do ye send supplies to your households, for I
am resolved to abide by this city, year after year, till I have
taken man bote for my brother Sharrkan, even if I die in this
stead." And when the army heard these words and had received his
gifts of money they replied, "To hear is to obey!" Thereupon he
summoned couriers and gave them letters and charged them to
deliver the same, together with the monies, to the soldiers'
families and inform them that all were safe and satisfied, and
acquaint them saying, "We are encamped before Constantinople and
we will either destroy it or die; and, albeit we be obliged to
abide here months and years, we will not depart hence till we
take it." Moreover, he bade the Wazir Dandan write to his sister,
Nuzhat al-Zaman, and said to him, "Acquaint her with what hath
befallen us, and what be our situation and commend my child to
her care since that, when I went out to war, my wife was near her
delivery and by this time she must needs have been brought to
bed; and if she hath given birth to a boy, as I have heard say,
hasten your return and bring me the acceptable news." Then he
gave them somewhat of money, which they pouched and set out at
once; and all the people flocked forth to take leave of them and
entrust them with the monies and the messages.  After they had
departed, Zau al-Makan turned to the Wazir Dandan and commanded
him to advance with the army against the city walls.  So the
troops pushed forward, but found none on the ramparts, whereat
they marvelled, while Zau al-Makan was troubled at the case, for
he deeply mourned the severance from his brother Sharrkan and he
was sore perturbed about that traitor the Ascetic.  In this
condition they abode three days without seeing anyone.  So far
concerning the Moslems; but as regards the Greeks and the cause
of their refusing to fight during these three days the case was
this.  As soon as Zat al-Dawahi had slain Sharrkan, she hastened
her march and reached the walls of Constantinople, where she
called out in the Greek tongue to the guards to throw her down a
rope.  Quoth they, "Who art thou?"; and quoth she, "I am Zat al-
Dawahi." They knew her and let down a cord to which she tied
herself and they drew her up; and, when inside the city, she went
in to the King Afridun and said to him, "What is this I hear from
the Moslems?  They say that my son King Hardub is slain." He
answered, "Yes;" and she shrieked out and wept right grievously
and ceased not weeping thus till she made Afridun and all who
were present weep with her.  Then she told the King how she had
slain Sharrkan and thirty of his servants, whereat he rejoiced
and thanked her; and, kissing her hands, exhorted her to
resignation for the loss of her son.  Said she, "By the truth of
the Messiah, I will not rest content with killing that dog of the
Moslem dogs in blood revenge for my son, a King of the Kings of
the age!  Now there is no help for it but that I work some guile
and I contrive a wile whereby to slay the Sultan Zau al-Makan and
the Wazir Dandan and the Chamberlain and Rustam and Bahram and
ten thousand cavaliers of the army of Al-Islam; for it shall
never be said that my son's head be paid with the bloodwit of
Sharrkan's head; no, never!" Then said she to King Afridun,
"Know, O King of the Age, that it is my wish to set forth
mourning for my son and to cut my Girdle and to break the
Crosses." Replied Afridun, "Do what thou desire; I will not
gainsay thee in aught.  And if thou prolong thy mourning for many
days it were a little thing; for though the Moslems resolve to
beleaguer us years and years, they will never win their will of
us nor gain aught of us save trouble and weariness." Then the
Accursed One (when she had ended with the calamity she had
wrought and the ignominies which in herself she had thought) took
ink case and paper and wrote thereon: "From Shawahi, Zat al-
Dawahi, to the host of the Moslems.  Know ye that I entered your
country and duped by my cunning your nobles and at first hand I
slew your King Omar bin al-Nu'uman in the midst of his palace. 
Moreover, I slew, in the affair of the mountain pass and of the
cave, many of your men; and the last I killed were Sharrkan and
his servants.  And if fortune do not stay me and Satan obey me, I
needs must slay me your Sultan and the Wazir Dandan, for I am she
who came to you in disguise of a Recluse and who heaped upon you
my devices and deceits.  Wherefore, an you would be in safety
after this, fare ye forth at once; and if you seek your own
destruction cease not abiding for the nonce; and though ye tarry
here years and years, ye shall not do your desire on us.  And so
peace be yours!" After writing her writ she devoted three days to
mourning for King Hardub; arid, on the fourth, she called a
Knight and bade him take the letter and make it fast to a shaft
and shoot it into the Moslem camp.  When this was done, she
entered the church and gave herself up to weeping and wailing for
the loss of her son, saying to him who took the kingship after
him, "Nothing will serve me but I must kill Zau al-Makan and all
the nobles of Al-Islam." Such was the case with her; but as
regards what occurred to the Moslems, all passed three days in
trouble and anxiety, and on the fourth when gazing at the walls
behold, they saw a knight holding a bow and about to shoot an
arrow along whose side a letter was bound.  So they waited till
he had shot it among them and the Sultan bade the Wazir Dandan
take the missive and read it.  He perused it accordingly; and,
when Zau al-Makan heard it to end and understood its purport, his
eyes filled with tears and he shrieked for agony at her perfidy;
and the Minister Dandan said, "By Allah, my heart shrank from
her!" Quoth the Sultan, "How could this whore play her tricks
upon us twice?  But by the Almighty I will not depart hence till
I fill her cleft with molten lead and jail her with the jailing
of a bird encaged, then bind her with her own hair and crucify
her over the gate of Constantinople." And he called to mind his
brother and wept with excessive weeping.  But when Zat al-Dawahi
arrived amongst the Infidels and related to them her adventures
at length, they rejoiced at her safety and at the slaying of
Sharrkan.  There upon the Moslems addressed themselves again to
the siege of the city and the Sultan promised his men that, if it
should be taken, he would divide its treasures among them in
equal parts.  But he dried not his tears grieving for his brother
till his body was wasted and sick, growing thin as a tooth pick. 
Presently the Wazir Dandan came in to him and said, "Be of good
cheer and keep thine eyes cool and clear; in very sooth thy
brother died not but because his hour was come, and there is no
profit in this mourning.  How well saith the poet,

"Whatso is not to be no sleight shall bring to pass; * What is to
     be without a failure shall become;
Soon the becoming fortune shall be found to be, * And Folly's
     brother [FN#453] shall abide forlorn and glum."

Wherefore do thou leave this weeping and wailing and hearten thy
heart to bear arms." He replied, "O Wazir, my heart is heavy for
the death of my father and my brother and for our absence from
hearth and home; and my mind is concerned for my subjects."
Thereupon the Wazir and the bystanders wept; but they ceased not
from pushing forward the siege of Constantinople for a length of
days.  And they being thus, behold, news arrived from Baghdad, by
one of the Emirs to the effect that the King's wife had been
blessed with a boy, and that his sister, Nuzhat al-Zaman, had
named him Kanmakan. [FN#454] Moreover, that the boy bid fair to be
famous, already showing wondrous signs and marvellous tokens; and
that she had commanded the Olema and the preachers to pray for
mother and child from the pulpits and bless them in all wise;
furthermore that the twain were well, that the land had enjoyed
abundant rains, and that his comrade the Fireman was established
in all prosperity, with eunuchs and slaves to wait upon him; but
that he was still ignorant of what had befallen him.  And she
ended with the greeting of peace.  Then quoth Zau al- Makan to
the Wazir Dandan, "Now is my back strengthened for that I have
been blest with a son whose name is Kanmakan."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

          When it was the One Hundred and Sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when they
brought him the news of his wife having borne him a boy child,
Zau al- Makan rejoiced with great joy and cried, "Now is my back
strengthened, for that I have been blessed with a son [FN#455]
whose name is Kanmakan." And he spake to the Wazir Dandan,
saying, "I am minded to leave this mourning and order perfections
of the Koran for my brother and command almsdeeds on his
account." Quoth the Wazir, "Thy design is good." Thereupon he
caused tents to be pitched over his brother's tomb; so they
raised them and gathered together such of the men at arms as
could repeat the Koran; and some began reciting the Holy volume;
whilst others chanted litanies containing the names of Allah, and
thus they did till the morning.  Then Zau al-Makan went up to the
grave of his brother Sharrkan and poured forth copious tears, and
improvised these couplets,

"They bore him bier'd, and all who followed wept * With Moses'
     shrieks what day o'erhead shook Tor; [FN#456]
Till reached the grave which Pate had made his home, * Dug in
     men's souls who one sole God adore:
Ne'er had I thought before to see my joy * Borne on the bier
     which heads of bearers bore:
Ah no!  nor ere they homed thee in the dust * That stars of
     heaven earth ever covered o'er.
Is the tomb dweller hostage of a stead, * Where light and
     splendour o'er thy face shall pour?
Praise to restore his life her word hath pledged: * Cribbed and
     confined he shall dispread the more!"

When Zau al-Makan had made an end of his versifying he wept and
wept with him all the troops; then he came to the grave and threw
himself upon it wild with woe, and the Wazir repeated the words
of the poet,

"Pain leaving life that fleets thou hast th' eternal won; * Thou
     didst as whilom many a doer like thee hath done
Leftest this worldly house without reproach or blame; * Ah, may
     th' ex change secure thee every benison!
Thou west from hostile onset shield and firm defence, * For us to
     baffle shafts and whistling spears to shun.
I see this world is only cheat and vanity, * Where man naught
     else must seek but please the Truthful One:
Th' Empyrean's Lord allow thee bower of heavenly bliss, * And wi'
     thy faithful friends The Guide show goodly wone:
I bid thee last good e'en with sigh of bitter grief, * Seeing the
     West in woe for lack of Easting Sun."

When the Wazir Dandan had finished his reciting, he wept with
sore weeping and the tears rained from his eyes like cushioned
pearls.  Then came forward one who had been of Sharrkan's boon
companions in his cups and he wept till ran in rills the drops,
and he enumerated the dead man's generous qualities, reciting the
following pentastichs,

"Where gone is Bounty since thy hand is turned to clay?  * And I
     in misery lie since thou west ta'en away.
See'st not, O litter guide [FN#457] (Heaven keep thee glad and
     gay!), * How tears adorn my cheeks, these furrowed wrinkles
     fray?
        A sight to joy shine eyes and fill thee with
        dismay. [FN#458]
By Allah ne'er this heart within I spoke of thee; * Ah no!  nor
     dared my sight to see thy brilliancy:
Save that my tear drops sorest wound have garred me dree * Yea!
     and if e'er on other rest these eyne of me,
        May yearning draw their reins nor suffer sleep to see."

And when the man stinted reciting, Zau al-Makan and the Minister
Dandan wept and the whole army was moved to tears; after which
all retired to their tents, and the King turning to the Wazir
took counsel with him concerning the conduct of the campaign.  On
this wise the two passed days and nights, while Zau al-Makan was
weighed down with grief and mourning till at last he said, "I
long to hear stories and adventures of Kings and tales of lover
folk enslaved by love; haply Allah may make this to solace that
which is on my heart of heavy anxiety, and stint and stay my
weeping and wailing." Quoth the Wazir, "If naught can dispel thy
trouble but hearing curious tales of Kings and people long gone
before and stories of folk enslaved by love of yore, and so
forth, this thing were easy, for I had no other business, in the
lifetime of thy father (who hath found mercy) than to relate
stories and to repeat verses to him.  This very night I will tell
thee a tale of a lover and his beloved, so shall thy breast be
broadened." When Zau al-Makan heard these words from the
Minister, his heart was set upon that which had been promised to
him and he did nothing but watch for the coming of the night,
that he might hear what the Wazir Dandan had to tell of the Kings
of yore and distracted lovers long gone before.  And hardly would
he believe that night had fallen ere he bade light the wax
candles and the lamps and bring all that was needful of meat and
drink and perfume gear, and what not; and when all was in
presence, he summoned the Wazir Dandan, and the Emirs Rustam and
Bahram and Tarkash and the Grand Chamberlain; then waited till
the whole party was seated before him; whereupon he turned to the
Minister and said, "Know, O Wazir, that night is come and hath
let down over us its veil of gloom, and we desire that thou tell
us those tales which thou promisedst us." Replied the Wazir,
"With joy and good will."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

         When it was the One Hundred and Seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King
Zau Al-Makan summoned the Wazir and the Chamberlain and Rustam
and Bahram, he turned towards the Minister Dandan and said,
"Know, O Wazir, that night is come and hath let down over us its
veil of gloom, and we desire that thou tell us those tales which
thou promisedst us." Replied the Wazir, "With love and gladness! 
Know, O auspicious King, that there reached my ears a relation of
a lover and a loved one and of the discourse between them and
what befel them of things rare and fair, a story such as
repelleth care from the heart and dispelleth sorrow like unto
that of the patriarch Jacob [FN#459]; and it is as follows":

Tale of Taj al-Muluk and the Princess Dunya
(The Lover and the Loved).

There stood in times long gone by behind the Mountains of
Ispahan, a city highs the Green City, wherein dwelt a King named
Sulayman Shah.  Now he was a man of liberality and beneficence,
of justice and integrity, of generosity and sincerity, to whom
travellers repaired from every country, and his name was noised
abroad in all regions and cities and he reigned many a year in
high worship and prosperity, save that he owned neither wives nor
children.  He had a Minister who rivalled him in goodness and
generosity and it so happened that one day, he sent for him and
when he came into the presence said to him, "O my Wazir, my heart
is heavy and my patience is past and my force faileth me, for
that I have neither wife nor child.  This is not the way of Kings
who rule over all men, princes.  and paupers; for they rejoice in
leaving behind them children and successors whereby are doubled
their number and their strength.  Quoth the Prophet (whom Allah
bless and keep!); 'Marry ye, increase ye, and multiply ye, that I
may boast me of your superiority over the nations on the Day of
Resurrection.' So what is thy rede, O Wazir?  Advise me of what
course and contrivance be advisable!" When the Minister heard
these words, the tears sprang from his eyes in streams, and he
replied, "Far be it from me, O King of the Age, that I debate on
that which appertaineth to the Compassionate One!  Wilt thou have
me cast into the fire by the All powerful King's wrath and ire? 
Buy thee a concubine." Rejoined the King, "Know, O Wazir, that
when a sovereign buyeth a female slave, he knoweth neither her
rank nor her lineage and thus he cannot tell if she be of simple
origin that he may abstain from her, or of gentle strain that he
may be intimate in her companionship.  So, if he have commerce
with her, haply she will conceive by him and her son be a
hypocrite, a man of wrath and a shedder of blood.  Indeed the
like of such woman may be instanced by a salt and marshy soil,
which if one till for ever it yieldeth only worthless growth and
no endurance show eth; for it may be that her son will be
obnoxious to his Lord's anger, doing not what He biddeth him or
abstaining from what He for biddeth him.  Wherefore will I never
become the cause of this through the purchase of a concubine; and
it is my desire that thou demand for me in marriage the daughter
of some one of the Kings, whose lineage is known and whose
loveliness hath renown.  If thou can direct me to some maiden of
birth and piety of the daughters of Moslem Sovranty, I will ask
her in marriage and wed her in presence of witnesses, so may
accrue to me the favour of the Lord of all Creatures." Said the
Wazir, "O King, verily Allah hath fulfilled thy wish and hath
brought thee to thy desire;" presently adding, "Know, O King, it
hath come to my knowledge that King Zahr Shah, [FN#460] Lord of
the White Land, hath a daughter of surpassing loveliness whose
charms talk and tale fail to express: she hath not her equal in
this age, for she is perfect in proportion and symmetry, black
eyed as if Kohl dyed and long locked, wee of waist and heavy of
hip.  When she draweth nigh she seduceth and when she turneth her
back [FN#461] she slayeth; she ravisheth heart and view and she
looketh even as saith of her the poet,

'A thin waist maid who shames the willow wand; * Nor sun nor moon
     can like her rising shine:
'Tis as her honey dew of lips were blent * With wine, and pearls
     of teeth were bathed in wine:
Her form, like heavenly Houri's, graceful slim; * Fair face; and
     ruin dealt by glancing eyne:
How many a dead done man her eyes have slain * Upon her way of
     love in ruin li'en:
An live I she's my death!  I'll say no more * But dying without
     her vain were life of mine.' "

Now when the Wazir had made an end of describing that maiden, he
said to Sulayman Shah, "It is my counsel, O King, that thou
despatch to her father an ambassador, sagacious, experienced and
trained in the ways of the world, who shall courteously demand
her in marriage for thee of her sire; for in good sooth she hath
not her equal in the far parts of the world nor in the near.  So
shalt thou enjoy her lovely face in the way of grace, and the
Lord of Glory be content with thy case; for it is reported of the
Prophet (whom Allah bless and preserve!) that he said, 'There be
no monkery in Al-Islam."' At this the King was transported to
perfect joy; his breast was broadened and lightened; care and
cark ceased from him and he turned to the Wazir and said, "Know
thou, O Minister, that none shall fare about this affair save
thou, by reason of thy consummate intelligence and good breeding;
wherefore hie thee home and do all thou hast to do and get thee
ready by the morrow and depart and demand me in marriage this
maiden, with whom thou hast occupied my heart and thought; and
return not to me but with her." Replied the Wazir, "I hear and I
obey." Then he tried to his own house and bade make ready
presents befitting Kings, of precious stones and things of price
and other matters light of load but weighty of worth, besides
Rabite steeds and coats of mail, such as David made [FN#462] and
chests of treasure for which speech hath no measure.  And the
Wazir loaded the whole on camels and mules, and set out attended
by an hundred slave girls with flags and banners flaunting over
his head.  The King charged him to return to him after a few
days; and, when he was gone, Sulayman Shah lay on coals of fire,
engrossed night and day with desire; while the envoy fared on
without ceasing through gloom and light, spanning fertile field
and desert site, till but a day's march remained between him and
the city whereto he was bound.  Here he sat him down on the banks
of a river and, summoning one of his confidants, bade him wend
his way to King Zahr Shah and announce his approach without
delay.  Quoth the messenger, "I hear and I obey!" And he rode on
in haste to that city and, as he was about to enter therein, it
so chanced that the King, who was sitting in one of his
pleasaunces before the city gate, espied him as he was passing
the doors, and knowing him for a stranger, bade bring him before
the presence.  So the messenger coming forward informed him of
the approach of the Wazir of the mighty King Sulayman Shah, Lord
of the Green Land and of the Mountains of Ispahan: whereat King
Zahr Shah rejoiced and welcomed him.  Then he carried him to his
palace and asked him, "Where leavedst thou the Wazir?"; and he
answered, "I left him in early day on the banks of such a river
and tomorrow he will reach thee, Allah continue his favours to
thee and have mercy upon thy parents!" Thereupon King Zahr Shah
commanded one of his Wazirs to take the better part of his
Grandees and Chamberlains and Lieutenants and Lords of the land,
and go out to meet the ambassador in honour of King Sulayman
Shah; for that his dominion extended over the country.  Such was
the case with Zahr Shah; but as regards the Wazir he abode in his
stead till night was half spent [FN#463] and then set out for the
city; but when morning shone and the sun rose upon hill and down,
of a sudden he saw King Zahr Shah's Wazir approaching him, with
his Chamberlains and high Lords and Chief Officers of the
kingdom; and the two parties joined company at some parasangs'
distance from the city. [FN#464]  Thereat the Wazir made sure of
the success of his errand and saluted the escort, which ceased
not preceding him till they reached the King's palace and passed
in before him through the gate to the seventh vestibule, a place
where none might enter on horseback, for it was near to where the
King sat.  So the Minister alighted and fared on a foot till he
came to a lofty saloon, at whose upper end stood a marble couch,
set with pearls and stones of price, and having for legs four
elephant's tusks.  Upon it was a coverlet of green satin purfled
with red gold, and above it hung a canopy adorned with pearls and
gems, whereon sat King Zahr Shah, whilst his officers of state
stood in attendance before him.  When the Wazir went in to him,
he composed his mind and, unbinding his tongue, displayed the
oratory of Wazirs and saluted the King in the language of
eloquence.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say,

         When it was the One Hundred and Eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Wazir of King Sulayman Shah entered the presence of King Zahr
Shah he composed his mind and, unbinding his tongue, displayed
the oratory of Wazirs and saluted the King in the language of
eloquence and improvised these couplets,

"He cometh robed and bending gracefully: * O'er crop and cropper
     dews of grace sheds he:
He charms; nor characts, spells nor gramarye * May fend the
     glances of those eyne from thee:
Say to the blamer, "Blame me not, for I * From love of him will
     never turn to flee":
My heart hath played me false while true to him, * And Sleep, in
     love with him, abhorreth me:
O heart!  th'art not the sole who loveth him, * So bide with him
     while I desertion dree:
There's nought to joy mine ears with joyous sound * Save praise
     of King Zahr Shah in jubilee:
A King albeit thou leave thy life to win * One look, that look
     were all sufficiency:
And if a pious prayer thou breathe for him, * Shall join all
     Faithfuls in such pious gree:
Folk of his realm!  If any shirk his right * For other hoping,
     gross Unfaith I see."

When the Wazir had ended his poetry, King Zahr Shah bade him draw
near and honoured him with the highmost honours; then, seating
him by his own side, smiled in his face and favoured him with a
gracious reply.  They ceased not on this wise till the time of
the under meal when the attendants brought forward the tables of
food in that saloon and all ate till they were sated; after which
the tables were removed and those who were in the assembly
withdrew, leaving only the chief officers.  Now when the Minister
saw this, he rose to his feet and, after complimenting the King a
second time and kissing the ground before him, spake as follows,
"O mighty King and dread Lord!  I have travelled hither and have
visited thee upon a matter which shall bring thee peace, profit
and prosperity: and it is this, that I come as ambassador to
thee, seeking in marriage thy daughter, the noble and illustrious
maid, from Sulayman Shah, a Prince famed for justice and
integrity, sincerity and generosity, Lord of the Green Land and
of the Mountains of Ispahan, who sendeth thee of presents a
store, and gifts of price galore, ardently desiring to become thy
son in law.  But art thou inclined to him as he to thee?" He then
kept silence, awaiting a reply.  When King Zahr Shah heard these
words, he sprang to his feet and kissed the ground respectfully
before the Wazir, while the bystanders were confounded at his
condescension to the ambassador and their minds were amazed. 
Then he praised Him who is the Lord of Honour and Glory and
replied (and he still standing), "O mighty Wazir and illustrious
Chief; hear thou what I say!  Of a truth we are to King Sulayman
Shah of the number of his subjects, and we shall be ennobled by
his alliance and we covet it ardently; for my daughter is a
handmaid of his handmaidens, and it is my dearest desire that he
may become my stay and my reliable support." Then he summoned the
Kazis and the witnesses, who should bear testimony that King
Sulayman Shah had despatched his Wazir as proxy to conclude the
marriage, and that King Zahr Shah joyfully acted and officiated
for his daughter.  So the Kazis concluded the wedding contract
and offered up prayers for the happiness and prosperity of the
wedded feres; after which the Wazir arose and, fetching the gifts
and rarities and precious things, laid them all before the King. 
Then Zahr Shah occupied himself anent the fitting out of his
daughter and honourably entertained the Wazir and feasted his
subjects all, great and small; and for two months they held high
festival, omitting naught that could rejoice heart and eye.  Now
when all things needful for the bride were ready, the King caused
the tents to be carried out and they pitched the camp within
sight of the city, where they packed the bride's stuffs in chests
and get ready the Greek handmaids and Turkish slave girls, and
provided the Princess with great store of precious treasures and
costly jewels.  Then he had made for her a litter of red gold,
inlaid with pearls and stones of price, and set apart two mules
to carry it; a litter which was like one of the chambers of a
palace, and within which she seemed as she were of the loveliest
Houris and it became as one of the pavilions of Paradise.  And
after they had made bales of the treasures and monies, and had
loaded them upon the mules and camels, King Zahr Shah went forth
with her for a distance of three parasangs; after which he bade
farewell to her and the Wazir and those with him, and returned to
his home in gladness and safety.  Thereupon the Wazir, faring
with the King's daughter, pushed on and ceased not his stages
over desert ways,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

          When it was the One Hundred and Ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
fared on with the King's daughter and ceased not forcing his
stages over desert ways and hastened his best through nights and
days, till there remained between him and his city but three
marches.  Thereupon he sent forward to King Sulayman Shah one who
should announce the coming of the bride.  The King rejoiced
thereat and bestowed on the messenger a dress of honour; and bade
his troops march forth in grand procession to meet the Princess
and her company for due worship and honour, and don their richest
apparel with banners flying over their heads.  And his orders
were obeyed.  He also commanded to cry throughout the city that
neither curtained damsel nor honoured lady nor time-ruptured
crone should fail to fare forth and meet the bride.  So they all
went out to greet her and the grandest of them vied in doing her
service and they agreed to bring her to the King's palace by
night.  More over, the chief officers decided to decorate the
road and to stand in espalier of double line, whilst the bride
should pass by preceded by her eunuchs and serving women and clad
in the gear her father had given her.  So when she made her
appearance, the troops surrounded her, these of the right wing
and those of the left, and the litter ceased not advancing with
her till she approached the palace; nor remained any but came
forth to gaze upon the Princess.  Drums were beaten and spears
were brandished and horns blared and flags fluttered and steeds
pranced for precedence and scents shed fragrance till they
reached the Palace gate and the pages entered with the litter
through the Harim wicket.  The place shone with its splendours
and the walls glittered for the glamour of its gear.  Now when
night came, the eunuchs threw open the doors of the bridal
chamber and stood surrounding the chief entrance whereupon the
bride came forward and amid her damsels she was like the moon
among stars or an union shining on a string of lesser pearls, and
she passed into the bridal closet where they had set for her a
couch of alabaster inlaid with unions and jewels.  As soon as she
had taken seat there, the King came in to her and Allah filled
his heart with her love so he abated her maidenhead and ceased
from him his trouble and disquiet.  He abode with her well nigh a
month but she had conceived by him the first night; and, when the
month was ended, he went forth and sat on his sofa of state, and
dispensed justice to his subjects, till the months of her
pregnancy were accomplished.  On the last day of the ninth month,
towards day break, the Queen was seized with the pangs of labour;
so she sat down on the stool of delivery and Allah made the
travail easy to her and she gave birth to a boy child, on whom
appeared auspicious signs.  When the King heard of this, he joyed
with exceeding joy and rewarded the bearer of the good tidings
with much treasure; and of his gladness he went in to the child
and kissed him between the eyes and wondered at his brilliant
loveliness; for in him was approved the saying of the poet,

"In the towering forts Allah throned him King, * A lion, a star
     in the skies of reign:
At his rising the spear and the throne rejoiced, * The gazelle,
     the ostrich, The men of main: [FN#465]
Mount him not on the paps, for right soon he'll show * That to
     throne on the war steed's loins he's fain:
And wean him from sucking of milk, for soon * A sweeter drink,
     the foe's blood, he'll drain."

Then the midwives took the newborn child and cut the navel cord
and darkened his eyelids with Kohl powder [FN#466] and named him
Taj al-Muluk Kharan. [FN#467]  He was suckled at the breast of
fond indulgence and was reared in the lap of happy fortune; and
thus his days ceased not running and the years passing by till he
reached the age of seven.  Thereupon Sulayman Shah summoned the
doctors and learned men and bade them teach his son writing and
science and belle-lettres.  This they continued to do for some
years, till he had learnt what was needful; and, when the King
saw that he was well grounded in whatso he desired, he took him
out of the teachers' and professors' hands and engaged for him a
skilful master, who taught him cavalarice and knightly exercises
till the boy attained the age of fourteen; and when he fared
abroad on any occasion, all who saw him were ravished by his
beauty and made him the subject of verse; and even pious men were
seduced by his brilliant loveliness.--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

          When it was the One Hundred and Tenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, That when Taj
al-Muluk Kharan, son of Sulayman Shah, became perfect in riding
craft and excelled all those of his time, his excessive beauty,
when he fared abroad on any occasion, caused all who saw him to
be ravished and to make him the subject of verse; and even pious
men were seduced by his brilliant loveliness.  Quoth the poet of
him,

"I clipt his form and wax'd drunk with his scent, * Fair branch
     to whom Zephyr gave nutriment:
Nor drunken as one who drinks wine, but drunk * With night
     draught his lips of the honey dew lent:
All beauty is shown in the all of him, * Hence all human hearts
     he in hand hath hens:
My mind, by Allah!  shall ne'er unmind * His love, while I wear
     life's chains till spent:
If I live, in his love I'll live; if I die * For pine and
     longing, 'O blest!' I'll cry

When he reached the eighteenth year of his age, tender
down [FN#468] sprouted, on his side face fresh with youth, from a
mole upon one rosy cheek and a second beauty spot, like a grain
of ambergris adorned the other; and he won the wits and eyes of
every wight who looked on him, even as saith the poet,

"He is Caliph of Beauty in Yusufs lieu, * And all lovers fear
     when they sight his grace:
Pause and gaze with me; on his cheek thou'lt sight * The
     Caliphate's banner of sable hue." [FN#469]

And as saith another,

"Thy sight hath never seen a fairer sight, * Of all things men
     can in the world espy,
Than yon brown mole, that studs his bonny cheek * Of rosy red
     beneath that jet black eye."

And as saith another,

"I marvel seeing yon mole that serves his cheeks' bright flame *
     Yet burneth not in fire albeit Infidel [FN#470]
I wonder eke to see that apostolic glance, * Miracle working,
     though it work by magic spell:
How fresh and bright the down that decks his cheek, and yet *
     Bursten gall bladders feed which e'en as waters well."

And as saith another,

"I marvel hearing people questioning of * The Fount of Life and
     in what land 'tis found:
I see it sprung from lips of dainty fawn, * Sweet rosy mouth with
     green mustachio down'd:
And wondrous wonder 'tis when Moses viewed * That Fount, he
     rested not from weary round." [FN#471]

Now having developed such beauty, when he came to man's estate
his loveliness increased, and it won for him many comrades and
intimates; while every one who drew near to him wished that Taj
al-Muluk Kharan might become Sultan after his father's death, and
that he himself might be one of his Emirs.  Then took he
passionately to chasing and hunting which he would hardly leave
for a single hour.  His father, King Sulayman Shah, would have
forbidden him the pursuit fearing for him the perils of the waste
and the wild beasts; but he paid no heed to his warning voice. 
And it so chanced that once upon a time he said to his attendants
"Take ye ten days food and forage;" and, when they obeyed his
bidding, he set out with his suite for sport and disport.  They
rode on into the desert and ceased not riding four days, till
they came to a place where the ground was green, and they saw in
it wild beasts grazing and trees with ripe fruit growing and
springs flowing.  Quoth Taj al-Muluk to his followers, "Set up
the nets here and peg them in a wide ring and let our trysting
place be at the mouth of the fence, in such a spot." So they
obeyed his words and staked out a wide circle with toils; and
there gathered together a mighty matter of all kinds of wild
beasts and gazelles, which cried out for fear of the men and
threw themselves for fright in the face of the horses.  Then they
loosed on to them the hounds and lynxes [FN#472] and
hawks; [FN#473] and they shot the quarry down with shafts which
pierced their vitals; and, by the time they came to the further
end of the net ring, they had taken a great number of the wild
beasts, and the rest fled.  Then Taj al-Muluk dismounted by the
water side and bade the game be brought before himself, and
divided it, after he had set apart the best of the beasts for his
father, King Sulayman Shah, and despatched the game to him; and
some he distributed among the officers of his court.  He passed
the night in that place, and when morning dawned there came up a
caravan of merchants conveying negro slaves and white servants,
and halted by the water and the green ground.  When Taj al-Muluk
saw them, he said to one of his companions, "Bring me news of
yonder men and question them why they have halted in this
place." [FN#474]  So the messenger went up to them and addressed
them, "Tell me who ye be, and answer me an answer without delay."
Replied they, "We are merchants and have halted to rest, for that
the next station is distant and we abide here because we have
confidence in King Sulayman Shah and his son, Taj al-Muluk, and
we know that all who alight in his dominions are in peace and
safety; more over we have with us precious stuffs which we have
brought for the Prince." So the messenger returned and told these
news to the King's son who, hearing the state of the case and
what the merchants had replied, said, "If they have brought stuff
on my account I will not enter the city nor depart hence till I
see it shown to me." Then he mounted horse and rode to the
caravan and his Mamelukes followed him till he reached it. 
Thereupon the merchants rose to receive him and invoked on him
Divine aid and favour with continuance of glory and virtues;
after which they pitched him a pavilion of red satin, embroidered
with pearls and jewels, wherein they spread him a kingly divan
upon a silken carpet worked at the upper end with emeralds set in
gold.  There Taj al-Muluk seated himself whilst his white
servants stood in attendance upon him, and sent to bid the
merchants bring out all that they had with them.  Accordingly,
they produced their merchandise, and displayed the whole and he
viewed it and took of it what liked him, paying them the price. 
Then he looked about him at the caravan, and remounted and was
about to ride onwards, when his glance fell on a handsome youth
in fair attire, and a comely and shapely make, with flower white
brow and moon like face, save that his beauty was wasted and that
yellow hues had overspread his cheeks by reason of parting from
those he loved;--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the One Hundred and Eleventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Taj Al-
Muluk, when he looked about him at the caravan, saw a handsome
youth in neat attire and of shapely make, with flower like
forehead and moon like face, save that his beauty was wasted and
yellow hues had overspread his cheeks by reason of parting from
those he loved; and great was his groaning and moaning, and the
tears streamed from his eyelids as he repeated these couplets,

"Longsome is Absence; Care and Fear are sore, * And ceaseless
     tears, O friend, mine eyes outpour:
Yea, I farewelled my heart on parting day * And heartless,
     hopeless, now I bide forlore:
Pause, O my friend, with me farewelling one * Whose words my cure
     can work, my health restore!"

Now when the youth ended his poetry he wept awhile and fell down
in a fainting fit, whilst Taj al-Muluk looked at him and wondered
at his case.  Then, coming to himself, he stared with distracted
air, and versified in these couplets,

"Beware her glance I rede thee, 'tis like wizard wight, * None
     can escape unscathed those eye shafts' glancing flight:
In very sooth black eyes, with languorous sleepy look, * Pierce
     deeper than white swords however these may bite.
Be not thy senses by her sweets of speech beguiled, * Whose
     brooding fever shall ferment in thought and sprite:
Soft sided Fair [FN#475] did silk but press upon her skin, *
     'Twould draw red blood from it, as thou thyself canst sight.
Chary is she of charms twixt neck and anklets dwell, * And ah!
     what other scent shall cause me such delight? [FN#476]"

Then he sobbed a loud sob and swooned away.  But when Taj al-
Muluk saw him in this case, he was perplexed about his state and
went up to him; and, as the youth came to his senses and saw the
King's son standing at his head, he sprang to his feet and kissed
the ground between his hands.  Taj al-Muluk asked him, 'Why didst
thou not show us thy merchandise?" end he answered, O my lord,
there is naught among my stock worthy of thine august highness."
Quoth the Prince, "Needs must thou show me what thou hast and
acquaint me with thy circumstance; for I see thee weeping eyed
and heavyhearted.  If thou have been oppressed, we will end thine
oppression, and if thou be in debt, we will pay thy debt; for of
a truth my heart burneth to see thee, since I first set eyes on
thee." [FN#477]  Then Taj al-Muluk bade the seats be set, and they
brought him a chair of ivory and ebony with a net work of gold
and silk, and spread him a silken rug for his feet.  So he sat
down on the chair and bidding the youth seat himself on the rug
said to him, "Show me thy stock in trade!" The young merchant
replied, "O my Lord, do not name this to me, for my goods be
unworthy of thee." Rejoined Taj al-Muluk "It needs must be
thus!"; and bade some of the pages fetch the goods.  So they
brought them in despite of him; and, when he saw them, the tears
streamed from his eyes and he wept and sighed and lamented: sobs
rose in his throat and he repeated these couplets,

"By what thine eyelids show of Kohl and coquetry!  * By what thy
     shape displays of lissome symmetry!
By what thy liplets store of honey dew and wine!  * By what thy
     mind adorns of gracious kindly gree!
To me thy sight dream-visioned, O my hope!  exceeds * The
     happiest escape from horriblest injury."

Then the youth opened his bales and displayed his merchandise to
Taj Al-Muluk in detail, piece by piece, and amongst them he
brought out a gown of satin brocaded with gold, worth two
thousand dinars.  When he opened the gown there fell a piece of
linen from its folds.  As soon as the young merchant saw this he
caught up the piece of linen in haste and hid it under his thigh;
and his reason wandered, and he began versifying,

"When shall be healed of thee this heart that ever bides in woe?
      * Than thee the Pleiad-stars more chance of happy meeting
     show
Parting and banishment and longing pain and lowe of love, *
     Procrastinating [FN#478] and delay these ills my life lay
     low:
Nor union bids me live in joy, nor parting kills by grief, * Nor
     travel draws me nearer thee nor nearer comest thou:
Of thee no justice may be had, in thee dwells naught of rush, *
     Nor gain of grace by side of thee, nor flight from thee I
     know:
For love of thee all goings forth and comings back are strait *
     On me, and I am puzzled sore to know where I shall go."

Taj al-Muluk wondered with great wonder at his verse, and could
not comprehend the cause.  But when the youth snatched up the bit
of linen and placed it under thigh, he asked him, "What is that
piece of linen?" "O my Lord," answered the merchant, "thou hast
no concern with this piece." Quoth the King's son, "Show it me;"
and quoth the merchant, "O my lord, I refused to show thee my
goods on account of this piece of linen; for I cannot let thee
look upon it."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say,

         When it was the One Hundred and Twelfth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
merchant said to Taj al-Muluk, "I did not refuse to show thee my
goods save on this account, for I cannot let thee look upon it."
Whereupon Taj al Muluk retorted, "Perforce I must and will see
it;" and insisted and became angry.  So the youth drew it out
from under his thigh, and wept and moaned and redoubled his sighs
and groans, and repeated these verses,

"Now blame him not; for blame brings only irk and pain! * Indeed,
     I spake him sooth but ne'er his ear could gain:
May Allah guard my moon which riseth in the vale * Beside our
     camp, from loosed robe like skyey plain: [FN#479]
I left him but had Love vouchsafed to leave for me * Some peace
     in life such leave of him I ne'er had ta'en:
How long he pleaded for my sake on parting morn, * While down his
     cheeks and mine tears ran in railing rain:
Allah belie me not: the garb of mine excuse * This parting rent,
     but I will Mend that garb again!
No couch is easy to my side, nor on such wise * Aught easeth him,
     when all alone without me lain:
Time with ill omened hand hath wrought between us two, * And made
     my waxing joys to wane and his to wane,
And poured mere grief and woe, what time Time fain had crowned *
     The bowl he made me drink and gave for him to drain."

When he ended his recitation, quoth Taj al-Muluk, "I see thy
conduct without consequence; tell me then why weepest thou at the
sight of this rag!" When the young merchant heard speak of the
piece of linen, he sighed and answered, "O my lord, my story is a
strange and my case out of range, with regard to this piece of
linen and to her from whom I brought it and to her who wrought on
it these figures and emblems." Hereupon, he spread out the piece
of linen, and behold, thereon was the figure of a gazelle wrought
in silk and worked with red gold, and facing it was another
gazelle traced in silver with a neck ring of red gold and three
bugles [FN#480] of chrysolite upon the ring.  When Taj al-Muluk
saw the beauty of these figures, he exclaimed, "Glory be to Allah
who teacheth man that which he knoweth not!" [FN#481]  And his
heart yearned to hear the youth's story; so he said to him, "Tell
me thy story with her who owned these gazelles." Replied the
young man: "Hear, O my Lord, the





 Tale of Aziz and Azizah. [FN#482]



My father was a wealthy merchant and Allah had vouchsafed him no
other child than myself; but I had a cousin, Azizah highs,
daughter of my paternal uncle and we twain were brought up in one
house; for her father was dead and before his death, he had
agreed with my father that I should marry her.  So when I reached
man's estate and she reached womanhood, they did not separate her
from me or me from her, till at last my father spoke to my mother
and said, "This very year we will draw up the contract of
marriage between Aziz and Azizah." So having agreed upon this he
betook himself to preparing provision for the wedding feast. 
Still we ceased not to sleep on the same carpet knowing naught of
the case, albeit she was more thoughtful, more intelligent and
quicker witted than I.  Now when my father had made an end of his
preparations, and naught remained for him but to write out the
contract and for me but to consummate the marriage with my
cousin, he appointed the wedding for a certain Friday, after
public prayers; and, going round to his intimates among the mer
chants and others, he acquainted them with that, whilst my mother
went forth and invited her women friends and summoned her kith
and kin.  When the Friday came, they cleaned the saloon and
prepared for the guests and washed the marble floor; then they
spread tapestry about our house and set out thereon what was
needful, after they had hung its walls with cloth of gold.  Now
the folk had agreed to come to us after the Friday prayers; so my
father went out and bade them make sweetmeats and sugared dishes,
and there remained nothing to do but to draw up the contract. 
Then my mother sent me to the bath and sent after me a suit of
new clothes of the richest; and, when I came out of the Hammam, I
donned those habits which were so perfumed that as I went along,
there exhaled from them a delicious fragrance scenting the
wayside.  I had designed to repair to the Cathedral mosque when I
bethought me of one of my friends and returned in quest of him
that he might be present at the writing of the contract; and
quoth I to myself, "This matter will occupy me till near the time
of congregational prayer." So I went on and entered a by street
which I had never before entered, perspiring profusely from the
effects of the bath and the new clothes on my body; and the sweat
streamed down whilst the scents of my dress were wafted abroad: I
therefore sat me at the upper end of the street resting on a
stone bench, after spreading under me an embroidered kerchief I
had with me.  The heat oppressed me more and more, making my
forehead perspire and the drops trickled along my cheeks; but I
could not wipe my face with my kerchief because it was dispread
under me.  I was about to take the skirt of my robe and wipe my
cheeks with it, when unexpectedly there fell on me from above a
white kerchief, softer to the touch than the morning breeze and
pleasanter to the sight than healing to the diseased.  I hent it
in hand and raised my head to see whence it had fallen, when my
eyes met the eyes of the lady who owned these gazelles.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say

       When it was the One Hundred and Thirteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the youth
continued to Taj al-Muluk: "So I raised my head to see whence
this kerchief had fallen, when my eyes met those of the lady who
owned these gazelles.  And lo! she was looking out of a wicket in
a lattice of brass and never saw my eyes a fairer than she, and
in fine my tongue faileth to describe her beauty.  When she
caught sight of me looking at her, she put her forefinger into
her mouth, then joined her middle finger and her witness
finger [FN#483] and laid them on her bosom, between her breasts;
after which she drew in her head and closed the wicket shutter
and went her ways.  There upon fire broke out in and was heaped
upon my heart, and greater grew my smart; the one sight cost me a
thousand sighs and I abode perplexed, for that I heard no word by
her spoken, nor understood the meaning of her token.  I looked at
the window a second time, but found it shut and waited patiently
till sundown, but sensed no sound and saw no one in view.  So
when I despaired of seeing her again, I rose from my place and
taking up the handkerchief, opened it, when there breathed from
it a scent of musk which caused me so great delight I became as
one in Paradise. [FN#484] Then I spread it before me and out
dropped from it a delicate little scroll; whereupon I opened the
paper which was perfumed with a delicious perfume, and therein
were writ these couplets,

"I sent to him a scroll that bore my plaint of love, * Writ in
     fine delicate hand; for writing proves man's skill:
Then quoth to me my friend, 'Why is thy writing thus; * So fine,
     so thin drawn 'tis to read unsuitable?'
Quoth I, 'for that I'm fine-drawn wasted, waxed thin, * Thus
     lovers' writ Should be, for so Love wills his will.

And after casting my eyes on the beauty of the kerchief, [FN#485]
I saw upon one of its two borders the following couplets worked
in with the needle,

"His cheek down writeth (O fair fall the goodly scribe!) * Two
     lines on table of his face in Rayhan-hand: [FN#486]
O the wild marvel of the Moon when comes he forth!  * And when he
     bends, O shame to every Willow wand!"

And on the opposite border these two couplets were traced,

"His cheek down writeth on his cheek with ambergris on pearl *
     Two lines, like jet on apple li'en, the goodliest design:
Slaughter is in those languid eyne whene'er a glance they deal, *
     And drunkenness in either cheek and not in any wine."

When I read the poetry on the handkerchief the flames of love
darted into my heart, and yearning and pining redoubled their
smart.  So I took the kerchief and the scroll and went home,
knowing no means to win my wish, for that I was incapable of
conducting love affairs and inexperienced in interpreting hints
and tokens.  Nor did I reach my home ere the night was far spent
and I found the daughter of my uncle sitting in tears.  But as
soon as she saw me she wiped away the drops and came up to me,
and took off my walking dress and asked me the reason of my
absence, saying, "All the folk, Emirs and notables and merchants
and others, assembled in our house; and the Kazi and the
witnesses were also present at the appointed time.  They ate and
tarried awhile sitting to await thine appearance for the writing
of the contract; and, when they despaired of thy presence, they
dispersed and went their ways.  And indeed," she added, "thy
father raged with exceeding wrath by reason of this, and swore
that he would not celebrate our marriage save during the coming
year, for that he hath spent on these festivities great store of
money." And she ended by asking, "What hath befallen thee this
day to make thee delay till now?; and why hast thou allowed that
to happen which happened because of thine absence?" Answered I,
"O daughter of mine uncle, question me not concerning what hath
befallen me." [FN#487] Then I told her all that had passed from
beginning to end, and showed her the handkerchief.  She took the
scroll and read what was written therein; and tears ran down her
cheeks and she repeated these cinquains,

"Who saith that Love at first of free will came, * Say him: Thou
     liest!  Love be grief and grame:
Yet shall such grame and grief entail no shame; * All annals
     teach us one thing and the same
        Good current coin clips coin we may not crepe!

An please thou, say there's pleasure in thy pain, * Find
     Fortune's playful gambols glad and fain:
Or happy blessings in th' unhappy's bane, * That joy or grieve,
     with equal might and main:
        Twixt phrase and antiphrase I'm all a heap!

But he, withal, whose days are summer bright, * Whom maids e'er
     greet with smiling lips' delight;
Whom spicey breezes fan in every site * And wins whate'er he
     wills, that happy wight
        White blooded coward heart should never keep!"

Then she asked me, "What said she, and what signs made she to
thee?" I answered, "She uttered not a word, but put her fore
finger in her mouth, then joining it to her middle finger, laid
both fingers on her bosom and pointed to the ground.  Thereupon
she withdrew her head and shut the wicket; and after that I saw
her no more.  However, she took my heart with her, so I sat till
sun down, expecting her again to look out of the window; but she
did it not; and, when I despaired of her, I rose from my seat and
came home.  This is my history and I beg thee to help me in this
my sore calamity." Upon this she raised her face to me and said,
"O son of mine uncle, if thou soughtest my eye, I would tear it
for thee from its eyelids, and perforce I cannot but aid thee to
thy desire and aid her also to her desire; for she is whelmed in
passion for thee even as thou for her." Asked I, "And what is the
interpretation of her signs?"; and Azizah answered, "As for the
putting her finger in her mouth, [FN#488] it showed that thou art
to her as her soul to her body and that she would bite into union
with thee with her wisdom teeth.  As for the kerchief, it
betokeneth that her breath of life is bound up in thee.  As for
the placing her two fingers on her bosom between her breasts, its
explanation is that she saith; 'The sight of thee may dispel my
grief.' For know, O my cousin, that she loveth thee and she
trusteth in thee.  This is my interpretation of her signs and,
could I come and go at Will, I would bring thee and her together
in shortest time, and curtain you both with my skirt." Hearing
these words I thanked her (continued the young merchant) for
speaking thus, and said to myself, "I will wait two days." So I
abode two days in the house, neither going out nor coming in;
neither eating nor drinking but I laid my head on my cousin's
lap, whilst she comforted me and said to me, "Be resolute and of
good heart and hope for the best!"--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say,

       When it was the One Hundred and Fourteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the youth
pursued to Taj al-Muluk:--"And when the two days were past she
said to me, "Be of good cheer and clear thine eyes of tears and
take courage to dress thyself and go to her, according to thy
tryst." Then she rose and changed my clothes and perfumed me with
incense smoke.  So I braced myself up and heartened my heart and
went out and walked on till I came to the by-street, where I sat
down on the bench awhile.  And behold, the wicket suddenly opened
and I looked up and seeing her, fell down in a swoon.  When I
revived, I called up resolution and took courage and gazed again
at her and again became insensible to the world around me.  Then
I came to myself and looking at her, saw that she held in hand a
mirror and a red kerchief.  Now when she caught my glance, she
bared her forearms and opened her five fingers and smote her
breast with palm and digits; and after this she raised her hands
and, holding the mirror outside the wicket, she took the red
kerchief and retired into the room with it, but presently
returned and putting out her hand with the kerchief, let it down
towards the lane three several times, dipping it and raising it
as often.  Then she wrung it out and folded it in her hands,
bending down her head the while; after which she drew it in from
the lattice and, shutting the wicket shutter, went away without a
single word; nay, she left me confounded and knowing not what
signified her signs. [FN#489].  I tarried sitting there till
supper time and did not return home till near midnight; and there
I found the daughter of my uncle with her cheek props in her hand
and her eyelids pouring forth tears; and she was repeating these
couplets,

"Woe's me! why should the blamer gar thee blaming bow?  * How be
     consoled for thee that art so tender bough?
Bright being! on my vitals cost thou prey, and drive * My heart
     before platonic passion's [FN#490] force to bow.
Thy Turk like [FN#491] glances havoc deal in core of me, * As
     furbished sword thin ground at curve could never show:
Thou weigh's" me down with weight of care, while I have not *
     Strength e'en to bear my shift, so weakness lays me low:
Indeed I weep blood tears to hear the blamer say; * 'The lashes
     of thy lover's eyne shall pierce thee through!'
Thou hast, my prince of loveliness! an Overseer, [FN#492] * Who
     wrongs me, and a Groom [FN#493] who beats me down with brow.
He foully lies who says all loveliness belonged * To Joseph, in
     thy loveliness is many a Joe:
I force myself to turn from thee, in deadly fright * Of spies;
     and what the force that turns away my sight!"

When I heard her verse, cark increased and care redoubled on me
and I fell down in a corner of our house; whereupon she arose in
haste and, coming to me lifted me up and took off my outer
clothes and wiped my face with her sleeve.  Then she asked me
what had befallen me, and I described all that had happened from
her.  Quoth she, "O my cousin, as for her sign to thee with her
palm and five fingers its interpretation is, Return after five
days; and the putting forth of her head out of the window, and
her gestures with the mirror and the letting down and raising up
and wringing out of the red kerchief, [FN#494] signify, Sit in the
dyer's shop till my messenger come to thee." When I heard her
words fire flamed up in my heart and I exclaimed, "O daughter of
my uncle, thou sayest sooth in this thine interpretation; for I
saw in the street the shop of a Jew dyer." Then I wept, and she
said, "Be of good cheer and strong heart: of a truth others are
occupied with love for years and endure with constancy the ardour
of passion, whilst thou hast but a week to wait; why then this
impatience?" Thereupon she went on cheering me with comfortable
talk and brought me food: so I took a mouthful and tried to eat
but could not; and I abstained from meat and drink and estranged
myself from the solace of sleep, till my colour waxed yellow and
I lost my good looks; for I had never been in love before nor had
I ever savoured the ardour of passion save this time.  So I fell
sick and my cousin also sickened on my account; but she would
relate to me, by way of consolation, stories of love and lovers
every night till I fell asleep; and when ever I awoke, I found
her wakeful for my sake with tears running down her cheeks.  This
ceased not till the five days were past, when my cousin rose and
warmed some water and bathed me with it.  Then she dressed me in
my best and said to me, "Repair to her and Allah fulfil thy wish
and bring thee to thy desire of thy beloved!" So I went out and
ceased not walking on till I came to the upper end of the by
street.  As it was the Sabbath [FN#495] I found the dyer's shop
locked and sat before it, till I heard the call to mid afternoon
prayer.  Then the sun yellowed and the Mu'ezzins [FN#496] chanted
the call to sundown prayer and the night came; but I saw no sign
nor heard one word, nor knew any news of her.  So I feared for my
life sitting there alone; and at last I arose and walked home
reeling like a drunken man.  When I reached the house, I found my
cousin Azizah standing, with one hand grasping a peg driven into
the wall and the other on her breast; and she was sighing and
groaning and repeating these couplets,

"The longing of an Arab lass forlorn of kith and kin * (Who to
     Hijazian willow wand and myrtle [FN#497] cloth incline,
And who, when meeting caravan, shall with love-lowe set light *
     To bivouac fire, and bang for conk her tears of pain and
     pine)
Exceeds not mine for him nor more devotion shows, but he * Seeing
     my heart is wholly his spurns love as sin indign."

Now when she had finished her verse she turned to me and, seeing
me, wiped away her tears and my tears with her sleeve.  Then she
smiled in my face and said, "O my cousin, Allah grant thee
enjoyment of that which He hath given thee!  Why didst thou not
pass the night by the side of thy beloved and why hast thou not
fulfilled thy desire of her?" When I heard her words, I gave her
a kick in the breast and she fell down in the saloon and her brow
struck upon the edge of the raised pavement and hit against a
wooden peg therein.  I looked at her and saw that her forehead
was cut open and the blood running,--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

        When it was the One Hundred and Fifteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
merchant continued to Taj al-Muluk: "Now when I kicked the
daughter of my uncle in the breast she fell on the edge of the
raised pavement in the saloon and her brow struck upon a wooden
peg.  Thereby her forehead was cut open and the blood ran down,
but she was silent and did not utter a single sound. [FN#498] 
Presently she rose up, and made some tinder of rags, then
staunching with it the bleeding wound, bound her forehead with a
bandage; after which she wiped up the blood that had fallen on
the carpet, and it was as if nothing had been.  Presently she
came up to me and smiling in my face, said with gentle voice, "By
Allah, O son of my uncle, I spake not these words to mock at thee
or at her!  But I was troubled with an ache in my head and was
minded to be blooded, but now thou hast eased my head and
lightened my brow; so tell me what hath befallen thee to day."
Thereupon I told her all that had passed between me and her that
day; and she wept as she heard my words and said, "O son of my
uncle, rejoice at the good tidings of thy desire being fulfilled
and thine aim being attained.  Of a truth this is a sign of
acceptance; for that she stayed away only because she wisheth to
try thee and know if thou be patient or not, and sincere in thy
love for her or otherwise.  Tomorrow, repair to her at the old
place and see what sign she maketh to thee; for indeed thy
gladness is near and the end of thy sadness is at hand." And she
went on to comfort me; but my cark and care ceased not to
increase on me.  Presently she brought me food which I kicked
away with my foot so that the contents of every saucer were
scattered in all directions, and I said, "Every lover is a
madman; he inclineth not to food neither enjoyeth he sleep." And
my cousin Azizah rejoined, "By Allah, O son of my uncle, these be
in very deed the signs of love!" And the tears streamed down her
cheeks whenas she gathered the fragments of the saucers and wiped
up the food; then she took seat and talked to me, whilst I prayed
Allah to hasten the dawn.  At last, when morning arose with its
sheen and shine, I went out to seek her and hastening to her by
street sat down on that bench, when lo!  the wicket opened and
she put out her head laughing.  Then she disappeared within and
returned with a mirror, a bag; and a pot full of green plants and
she held in hand a lamp.  The first thing she did was to take the
mirror and, putting it into the bag, tie it up and throw it back
into the room; then she let down her hair over her face and set
the lamp on the pot of flowers during the twinkling of an eye;
then she took up all the things and went away shutting the window
without saying a word.  My heart was riven by this state of the
case, and by her secret signals, her mysterious secrets and her
utter silence; and thereby my longing waxed more violent and my
passion and distraction redoubled on me.  So I retraced my steps,
tearful-eyed and heavy hearted, and returned home, where I found
the daughter of my uncle sitting with her face to the wall; for
her heart was burning with grief and galling jealousy; albeit her
affection forbade her to acquaint me with what she suffered of
passion and pining when she saw the excess of my longing and
distraction.  Then I looked at her and saw on her head two
bandages, one on account of the accident to her forehead and the
other over her eye in consequence of the pain she endured for
stress of weeping; and she was in miserable plight shedding tears
and repeating these couplets,

"I number nights; indeed I count night after night; * Yet lived I
     long ere learnt so sore accompt to see, ah!
Dear friend, I compass not what Allah pleased to doom * For
     Layla, nor what Allah destined for me, ah!
To other giving her and unto me her love, * What loss but Layla's
     loss would He I ever dree, ah!"

And when she had finished her reciting, she looked towards me and
seeing me through her tears, wiped them away and came up to me
hastily, but could not speak for excess of love.  So she remained
silent for some while and then said, "O my cousin, tell me what
befel thee with her this time." I told her all that had passed
and she said, "Be patient, for the time of thy union is come and
thou hast attained the object of thy hopes.  As for her signal to
thee with the mirror which she put in the bag, it said to thee,
When the sun is set; and the letting down of her hair over her
face signified, When night is near and letteth fall the blackness
of the dark and hath starkened the daylight, come hither.  As for
her gesture with the pot of green plants it meant, When thou
comest, enter the flower garden which is behind the street; and
as for her sign with the lamp it denoted, When thou enterest the
flower garden walk down it and make for the place where thou
seest the lamp shining; and seat thyself beneath it and await me;
for the love of thee is killing me." When I heard these words
from my cousin, I cried out from excess of passion and said, "How
long wilt thou promise me and I go to her, but get not my will
nor find any true sense in thine interpreting." Upon this she
laughed and replied, "It remaineth for thee but to have patience
during the rest of this day till the light darken and the night
starker and thou shalt enjoy union and accomplish thy hopes; and
indeed all my words be without leasing." Then she repeated these
two couplets,

"Let days their folds and plies deploy, * And shun the house that
     deals annoy!
Full oft when joy seems farthest far * Thou nighmost art to hour
     of joy."'

Then she drew near to me and began to comfort me with soothing
speech, but dared not bring me aught of food, fearing lest I be
angry with her and hoping I might incline to her; so when coming
to me she only took off my upper garment and said to me, "Sit O
my cousin, that I may divert thee with talk till the end of the
day and, Almighty Allah willing, as soon as it is night thou
shalt be with thy beloved." But I paid no heed to her and ceased
not looking for the approach of darkness, saying, "O Lord, hasten
the coming of the night!" And when night set in, the daughter of
my uncle wept with sore weeping and gave me a crumb of pure musk,
and said to me, "O my cousin, put this crumb in thy mouth, and
when thou hast won union with thy beloved and hast taken thy will
of her and she hath granted thee thy desire, repeat to her this
couplet,

'Ho, lovers all!  by Allah say me sooth * What shall he do when
     love sore vexeth youth?'" [FN#499]

And she kissed me and swore me not to repeat this couplet till I
should be about to leave my lover and I said, "Hearing is
obeying!" And when it was supper-tide I went out and ceased not
walking on till I came to the flower garden whose door I found
open.  So I entered and, seeing a light in the distance, made
towards it and reaching it, came to a great pavilion vaulted over
with a dome of ivory and ebony, and the lamp hung from the midst
of the dome.  The floor was spread with silken carpets
embroidered in gold and silver, and under the lamp stood a great
candle, burning in a candelabrum of gold.  In mid pavilion was a
fountain adorned with all manner of figures; [FN#500] and by its
side stood a table covered with a silken napkin, and on its edge
a great porcelain bottle full of wine, with a cup of crystal
inlaid with gold.  Near all these was a large tray of silver
covered over, and when I uncovered it I found therein fruits of
every kind, figs and pomegranates, grapes and oranges, citrons
and shaddocks [FN#501] disposed amongst an infinite variety of
sweet scented flowers, such as rose, jasmine, myrtle, eglantine,
narcissus and all sorts of sweet smelling herbs.  I was charmed
with the place and I joyed with exceeding joy, albeit I found not
there a living soul and my grief and anxiety ceased from me.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day, and ceased to say her
permitted say.

        When it was the One Hundred and Sixteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
merchant continued to Taj al-Muluk: "I was charmed with the place
and joyed with great joy albeit there I found not a living soul
of Almighty Allah's creatures, and saw nor slave nor hand maid to
oversee these things or to watch and ward these properties.  So I
sat down in the pavilion to await the coming of the beloved of my
heart; but the first hour of the night passed by, and the second
hour, and the third hour, and still she came not.  Then hunger
grew sore upon me, for that it was long since I had tasted food
by reason of the violence of my love: but when I found the place
even as my cousin had told me, and saw the truth of her in
terpretation of my beloved's signs, my mind was set at rest and I
felt the pangs of hunger; moreover, the odour of the viands on
the table excited me to eat.  So making sure of attaining my
desire, and being famished for food I went up to the table and
raised the cover and found in the middle a china dish containing
four chickens reddened with roasting and seasoned with spices,
round the which were four saucers, one containing sweetmeats,
another conserve of pomegranate seeds, a third almond
pastry [FN#502] and a fourth honey fritters; and the contents of
these saucers were part sweet and part sour.  So I ate of the
fritters and a piece of meat, then went on to the almond cakes
and ate what I could; after which I fell upon the sweetmeats,
whereof I swallowed a spoonful or two or three or four, ending
with part of a chicken and a mouthful of something beside.  Upon
this my stomach became full and my joints loose and I waxed too
drowsy to keep awake; so I laid my head on a cushion, after
having washed my hands, and sleep over came me; I knew not what
happened to me after this, and I awoke not till the sun's heat
scorched me, for that I had never once tasted sleep for days
past.  When I awoke I found on my stomach a piece of salt and a
bit of charcoal; so I stood up and shook my clothes and turned to
look right and left, but could see no one; and discovered that I
had been sleeping on the marble pavement without bedding beneath
me.  I was perplexed thereat and afflicted with great affliction;
the tears ran down my cheeks and I mourned for myself.  Then I
returned home, and when I entered, I found my cousin beating her
hand on her bosom and weeping tears like rain shedding clouds;
and she versified with these couplets,

"Blows from my lover's land a Zephyr cooly sweet, * And with its
     every breath makes olden love new glow:
O Zephyr of the morning hour, come show to us * Each lover hath
     his lot, his share of joy and woe:
Could I but win one dearest wish, we had embraced * With what
     embrace and clip of breast fond lovers know.
Allah forbids, while bides unseen my cousin's face, * All joys
     the World can give or hand of Time bestow.
Would Heaven I knew his heart were like this heart of me, *
     Melted by passion-flame and charged with longing owe."

When she saw me, she rose in haste and wiped away her tears and
addressed me with her soft speech, saying, "O son of my uncle,
verily Allah hath been gracious to thee in thy love, for that she
whom thou lovest loveth thee, whilst I pass my time in weeping
and bewailing my severance from thee who blamest me and chidest
me; but may Allah not punish thee for my sake!" Thereupon she
smiled in my face a smile of reproach and caressed me; then
taking off my walking clothes, she spread them out and said, "By
Allah, this is not the scent of one who hath enjoyed his lover! 
So tell me what hath befallen thee, O my cousin." I told her all
that had passed, and she smiled again a smile of reproach and
said, "Verily, my heart is full of pain; but may he not live who
would hurt thy heart!  Indeed, this woman maketh herself
inordinately dear and difficult to thee, and by Allah, O son of
my uncle, I fear for thee from her. [FN#503]  Know, O my cousin,
that the meaning of the salt is thou west drowned in sleep like
insipid food, disgustful to the taste; and it is as though she
said to thee; 'It behoveth thou be salted lest the stomach eject
thee; for thou professes to be of the lovers noble and true; but
sleep is unlawful and to a lover undue; therefore is thy love but
a lie.' However, it is her love for thee that lieth; for she saw
thee asleep yet aroused thee not and were her love for thee true,
she had indeed awoken thee.  As for the charcoal, it means 'Allah
blacken thy face' [FN#504] for thou makest a lying presence of
love, whereas thou art naught but a child and hast no object in
life other than eating and drinking and sleeping!  such is the
interpretation of her signs, and may Allah Almighty deliver thee
from her!" When I heard my cousin's words, I beat my hand upon my
breast and cried out, "By Allah, this is the very truth, for I
slept and lovers sleep not!  Indeed I have sinned against myself,
for what could have wrought me more hurt than eating and
sleeping?  Now what shall I do?" Then I wept sore and said to the
daughter of my uncle, "Tell me how to act and have pity on me, so
may Allah have pity on thee: else I shall die." As my cousin
loved me with very great love,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Seventeenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
merchant continued his tale to Taj al-Muluk: "Thereupon quoth I
to the daughter of my uncle, "Tell me what to do and have pity on
me, so may Allah have pity on thee!" As the daughter of my uncle
loved me with great love, she replied, "On my head and eyes! 
But, O my cousin, I repeat what I have told thee oftentimes, if I
could go in and out at will, I would at once bring you two
together and cover you both with my skirt: nor would I do this
but hoping to win thy favour.  Inshallah, I will do my utmost
endeavour to unite you; but hear my words and do my bidding.  Go
thou to the very same place and sit down where thou sattest
before and at supper tide look thou eat not, for eating induceth
sleep; and have a care-thou slumber not, for she will not come to
thee till a fourth part of the night be passed.  And the Almighty
avert her mischief from thee!" Now when I heard these words I
rejoiced and besought Allah to hasten the night; and, as soon as
it was dark, I was minded to go, and my cousin said to me, "When
thou shalt have met her, repeat to her the couplet I taught thee
before, at the time of thy leave taking." Replied I, "On my head
and eyes!" and went out and repaired to the garden, where I found
all made ready in the same state as on the previous night, with
every requisite of meat and drink, dried fruits, sweet scented
flowers and so forth.  I went up into the pavilion and smelt the
odour of the viands and my spirit lusted after them; but I
possessed my soul in patience for a while, till at last I could
no longer withstand temptation.  So I arose from my seat and went
up to the table and, raising its cover, found a dish of fowls,
surrounded by four saucers containing four several meats.  I ate
a mouthful of each kind and as much as I would of the sweetmeats
and a piece of meat: then I drank from the saucer a sauce
yellowed with saffron [FN#505] and as it pleased me, I supped it
up by the spoonful till I was satisfied and my stomach was full. 
Upon this, my eyelids drooped; so I took a cushion and set it
under my head, saying, "Haply I can recline upon it without going
to sleep." Then I closed my eyes and slept, nor did I wake till
the sun had risen, when I found on my stomach a cube of
bone, [FN#506] a single tip-cat stick, [FN#507] the stone of a
green date [FN#508] and a carob pod.  There was no furniture nor
aught else in the place, and it was as if there had been nothing
there yesterday.  So I rose and shaking all these things off me,
fared forth in fury; and, going home, found my cousin groaning
and versifying with these couplets,

"A wasted body, heart enpierced to core, * And tears that down my
     poor cheeks pour and pour:
And lover cure of access; but, but still * Naught save what's
     fair can come from fairest flow'r:
O cousin mine thou fill'st my soul with pate, * And from these
     tears mine eyelids ache full sore!"

I chid the daughter of my uncle and abused her, whereat she wept;
then, wiping away her tears, she came up to me and kissed me and
began pressing me to her bosom, whilst I held back from her
blaming myself.  Then said she to me, "O my cousin, it seemeth
thou sleptest again this night?" Replied I, "Yes; and when I
awoke, I found on my stomach a cube of bone, a single tip-cat
stick, a stone of a green date and a carob pod, and I know not
why she did this." Then I wept and went up to her and said,
"Expound to me her meaning in so doing and tell me how shall I
act and aid me in my sore strait." She answered, "On my head and
eyes!  By the single tip cat stick and the cube of bone which she
placed upon thy stomach she saith to thee 'Thy body is present
but thy heart is absent'; and she meaneth, 'Love is not thus: so
do not reckon thyself among lovers.' As for the date stone, it is
as if she said to thee, 'An thou wert in love thy heart would be
burning with passion and thou wouldst not taste the delight of
sleep; for the sweet of love is like a green date [FN#509] which
kindleth a coal of fire in the vitals.' As for the carob
pod [FN#510] it signifieth to thee, 'The lover's heart is
wearied'; and thereby she saith, 'Be patient under our separation
with the patience of Job.' " When I heard this interpretation,
fires darted into my vitals like a dart and grief redoubled upon
my heart and I cried out, saying, "Allah decreed sleep to me for
my ill fortune." Then I said to her, "O my cousin, by my life,
devise me some device whereby I may win my will of her!" She wept
and answered, "O Aziz, O son of my uncle, verily my heart is full
of sad thought which I cannot speak: but go thou again to night
to the same place and beware thou sleep not, and thou shalt
surely attain thy desire.  This is my counsel and peace be with
thee!" Quoth I, "If Allah please I will not sleep, but will do as
thou biddest me." Then my cousin rose, and brought me food,
saying, "Eat now what may suffice thee, that nothing may divert
thy heart." So I ate my fill and, when night came, my cousin rose
and bringing me a sumptuous suit of clothes clad me therein. 
Then she made me swear I would repeat to my lover the verse
aforesaid and bade me beware of sleeping.  So I left her and
repaired to the garden and went up into that same pavilion where
I occupied myself in holding my eyelids open with my fingers and
nodding my head as the night darkened on me."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Eighteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
merchant continued to Taj al Muluk: "So I repaired to the garden
and went up into that same pavilion and occupied myself in gazing
upon the flower beds and in holding my eyelids open with my
fingers and nodding my head as the night darkened on me.  And
presently I grew hungry with watching and the smell of the meats
being wafted towards me, my appetite increased: so I went up to
the table and took off the cover and ate a mouthful of every dish
and a bit of meat; after which I turned to the flagon of wine,
saying to myself, I will drink one cup.  I drank it, and then I
drank a second and a third, till I had drunk full ten, when the
cool air smote me and I fell to the earth like a felled man.  I
ceased not to lie thus till day arose, when I awoke and found
myself out side the garden, and on my stomach were a butcher's
knife and a dram-weight of iron. [FN#511]  Thereat I trembled and,
taking them with me, went home, where I found my cousin saying,
"Verily, I am in this house wretched and sorrowful, having no
helper but weeping." Now when I entered, I fell down at full
length and throwing the knife and the dram weight from my hand, I
fainted clean away.  As soon as I came to myself, I told her what
had befallen me and said, Indeed, I shall never enjoy my desire."
But when she saw my tears and my passion, they redoubled her
distress on my account, and she cried, "Verily, I am helpless!  I
warned thee against sleeping; but thou wouldst not hearken to my
warning, nor did my words profit thee aught." I rejoined, "By
Allah, I conjure thee to explain to me the meaning of the knife
and the iron dram-weight." "By the dram weight," replied my
cousin, "she alludeth to her right eye, [FN#512] and she sweareth
by it and saith, 'By the Lord of all creatures and by my right
eye!  if thou come here again and sleep, I will cut thy throat
with this very knife.' And indeed I fear for thee, O my cousin,
from her malice; my heart is full of anguish for thee and I
cannot speak.  Nevertheless, if thou can be sure of thyself not
to sleep when thou returnest to her, return to her and beware of
sleeping and thou shalt attain thy desire; but if when returning
to her thou wilt sleep, as is thy wont, she will surely slaughter
thee." Asked I, "What shall I do, O daughter of my uncle: I beg
thee, by Allah, to help me in this my calamity." Answered she,
"On my head and eyes!  if thou wilt hearken to my words and do my
bidding, thou shalt have thy will." Quoth I, "I will indeed
hearken to thy words and do thy bidding;" and quoth she, "When it
is time for thee to go, I will tell thee." Then she pressed me to
her bosom and laying me on the bed, shampoo'd my feet, till
drowsiness overcame me and I was drowned in sleep, then she took
a fan and seated herself at my head with the fan in her hand and
she was weeping till her clothes were wet with tears.  Now when
she saw that I was awake, she wiped away the drops and fetched me
some food and set it before me.  I refused it, but she said to
me, "Did I not tell thee that thou must do my bidding?  Eat!" So
I ate and thwarted her not and she proceeded to put the food into
my mouth and I to masticate it, till I was full.  Then she made
me drink jujube sherbet [FN#513] and sugar and washed my hands and
dried them with a kerchief; after which she sprinkled me with
rose water, and I sat with her awhile in the best of spirits. 
When the darkness had closed in, she dressed me and said to me,
"O son of my uncle, watch through the whole night and sleep not;
for she will not come to thee this tide till the last of the dark
hours and, Allah willing, thou shalt be at one with her this
night; but forget not my charge." Then, she wept, and my heart
was pained for her by reason of her over much weeping, and I
asked, "What is the charge thou gayest me?" She answered, "When
thou takest leave of her repeat to her the verse before
mentioned." So, full of joy I left her and repairing to the
garden, went up into the pavilion where, being satiated with
food, I sat down and watched till a fourth part of the dark hours
was past.  That night seemed longsome to me as it were a year:
but I remained awake till it was three quarters spent and the
cocks crew and I was famished for long watching.  Accordingly I
went up to the table and ate my fill, whereupon my head grew
heavy and I wanted to sleep, when behold, a light appeared making
towards me from afar.  I sprang up and washed my hands and mouth
and roused myself; and before long she came with ten damsels, in
whose midst she was like the full moon among the stars.  She was
clad in a dress of green satin purfled with red gold, and she was
as saith the poet,

"She lords it o'er our hearts in grass green gown, * With
     buttons [FN#514] loose and locks long flowing down.
Quoth I, 'What is thy name?' Quoth she, 'I'm she, * Who burns the
     lover-heart live coals upon:'
I made my plaint to her of loving lowe; * Laughed she, 'To stone
     thou moanest useless moan!'
Quoth I, 'An be of hardest stone thy heart, * Allah drew sweetest
     spring from hardest stone.' "

When she saw me she laughed and said, "How is it that thou art
awake and that sleep overcame thee not?  Forasmuch as thou hast
watched through the night, I know that thou art a lover; for
night watching is the mark of lovers displaying brave endurance
of their desires." Then she turned to her women and signed to
them and they went away from her, whereupon she came up to me and
strained me to her breast and kissed me, whilst I kissed her, and
she sucked my upper lip whilst I sucked her lower lip.  I put my
hand to her waist and pressed it and we came not to the ground
save at the same moment.  Then she undid her petticoat trousers
which slipped down to her anklets, and we fell to clasping and
embracing and toying and speaking softly and biting and inter
twining of legs and going round about the Holy House and the
corners thereof, [FN#515] till her joints became relaxed for love
delight and she swooned away.  I entered the sanctuary, and
indeed that night was a joy to the sprite and a solace to the
sight even as saith the poet,

"Sweetest of nights the world can show to me, that night * When
     cups went round and round as fed by ceaseless spring:
There utter severance made I 'twixt mine eyes and sleep, * And
     joined, re joined mine ear drop with the anklet
     ring." [FN#516]

We lay together in close embrace till the morning when I would
have gone away, but she stopped me and said, "Stay till I tell
thee something"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Nineteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
merchant continued his recital to Taj al Muluk: "When I would
have gone away, she stopped me and said, "Stay, till I tell thee
something and charge thee with a charge." So I stayed whilst she
unfolded a kerchief and drew out this piece of linen and spread
it open before me.  I found worked on it these two figures of
gazelles and admired it with great admiration.  Then I took the
piece of linen and went away, joyful, after we had agreed that I
should visit her every night in the garden; but in my joy I
forgot to repeat to her the verse my cousin had taught me.  For
when giving me the piece of linen with the gazelles she had said
to me, "Keep this carefully, as it is my sister's handiwork." I
asked her, "What is thy sister's name?"; and she answered, "Her
name is Nur al-Huda." When I went to my cousin, I found her lying
down; but as soon as she saw me, she rose, with the tears running
from her eyes, and came up to me, and kissed me on the breast and
said, "Didst thou do as I enjoined thee?  and repeat the verse to
her?" "I forgot it," replied I; "and nothing drove it out of my
mind but these two figured gazelles." And I threw the piece of
linen on the floor before her.  She rose and sat down again, but
was unable to contain herself for impatience, and her eyes ran
over with tears, whilst she repeated these two couplets,

"O thou who seekest parting, softly fare!  * Let not the Pair
     delude with cunning art:
Pare softly, Fortune's nature is to 'guile, * And end of every
     meeting is to part."

And when she ended her recitation she said, "O my cousin, give me
this piece of linen." So I gave it to her and she took it and
unfolding it, saw what was therein.  When the tryst time came for
my going to my lover, the daughter of my uncle said to me, "Go,
and peace attend thee; and when thou art about to leave her,
recite to her the verse I taught thee long ago and which thou
didst forget." Quoth I, "Tell it me again"; and she repeated it. 
Then I went to the garden and entered the pavilion, where I found
the young lad, awaiting me.  When she saw me, she rose and kissed
me and made me sit in her lap; and we ate and drank and did our
desire as before.  In the morning, I repeated to her my cousin's
verse which was this,

"Ho, lovers all!  by Allah say me sooth * What shall he do when
     Love sor' vexeth youth?"

When she heard this, her eyes filled with tears and she answered
and said,

"Strive he to cure his case, to hide the truth, * Patiently
     humble self and sue for rush!"

I committed it to memory and returned home rejoicing at having
done my cousin's bidding.  When I entered the house I found her
lying down and my mother at her head weeping over her case; but
as soon as I went in to her my mother said to me, "A foul plague
on such a cousin!  How couldst thou leave the daughter of thy
uncle ailing and not ask what ailed her?" But when my cousin saw
me she raised her head and sat up and asked me, "O Aziz, didst
thou repeat to her the couplet I taught thee?" I answered, "Yes,
and when she heard it she wept and recited in answer another
couplet which I committed to memory." Quoth my cousin, "Tell it
me." I did so; and when she heard it she wept with much weeping
and repeated the following verses,

'How shall youth cure the care his life undo'th, * And every day
     his heart in pieces hew'th?
In sooth he would be patient, but he findeth * Naught save a
     heart which love with pains imbu'th."

Then added my cousin, "When thou goest to her as of wont, repeat
to her also these two couplets which thou hast heard." I replied,
"Hearkening and obedience!" and I went at the wonted time, to the
garden, where there passed between my mistress and myself what
tongue faileth to describe.  When I was about to leave her, I
repeated to her those two couplets of my cousin's; whereupon the
tears streamed from her eyes and she replied,

"If he of patience fail the truth to hide * For him no cure save
     Death my vision view'th!"

I committed them to memory and returned home, and when I went in
to my cousin I found her fallen into a fit and my mother sitting
at her head.  When she heard my voice, she opened her eyes and
asked, "O Aziz! didst thou repeat the two couplets to her?"
whereto I answered, "Yes; but she wept on hearing them and she
replied with this couplet beginning, If he of patience fail, to
the end." And I repeated it; whereupon my cousin swooned again,
and when she came to herself, she recited these two couplets,

"Hearkening, obeying, with my dying mouth * I greet who joy of
     union ne'er allow'th:
Pair fall all happy loves, and fair befal * The hapless lover
     dying in his drowth!"

Again when it was night, I repaired to the garden as usual where
I found the young lady awaiting me.  We sat down and ate and
drank, after which we did all we wanted and slept till the
morning; and, as I was going away, I repeated to her the saying
of my cousin.  When she heard the couplet she cried out with a
loud cry and was greatly moved and exclaimed, "Awah! 
Awah! [FN#517]  By Allah, she who spake these lines is dead!" Then
she wept and said to me, "Woe to thee!  How is she who spoke thus
related to thee?" Replied I, "She is the daughter of my father's
brother." "Thou liest," rejoined she; "by Allah, were she thy
cousin, thou hadst borne her the same love as she bore thee!  It
is thou who hast slain her and may the Almighty kill thee as thou
killedst her!  By Allah, hadst thou told me thou hadst a cousin,
I would not have admitted thee to my favours!" Quoth I, "Verily
it was she who interpreted to me the signs thou madest and it was
she who taught me how to come to thee and how I should deal with
thee; and, but for her, I should never have been united to thee."
She then asked me, "Did thy cousin then know of us?"; and I
answered, "Yes;" whereupon she exclaimed, "Allah give thee sorrow
of thy youth, even as thou hast sorrowed her youth!" Then she
cried to me, "Go now and see after her." So I went away troubled
at heart, and ceased not walking till I reached our street, when
I heard sounds of wailing, and asking about it, was answered,
"Azizah, we found her dead behind the door." I entered the house,
and when my mother saw me, she said, "Her death lieth heavy on
thy neck and may Allah not acquit thee of her blood!"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

        When it was the One Hundred and Twentieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
merchant continued to Taj al-Muluk: "So I entered the house and
when my mother saw me she said, "Her death lieth heavy on thy
neck and may Allah not acquit thee of her blood!  A plague on
such a cousin!" Then came my father, and we laid her out and get
ready her bier and buried her; and we had recitations of the
whole Koran over her tomb and we abode by her grave three days,
after which we returned to our home, and I grieving for her
grievously.  Then my mother came to me and said, "I would fain
know what thou didst to her, to break her heart [FN#518] for, O my
son, I questioned her at all times of the cause of her complaint,
but she would tell me nothing nor let me know aught of it.  So
Allah upon thee, tell me what thou hast been doing to her that
she died." Quoth I, "I did nothing." Quoth my mother, "Allah
avenge her on thee!  Verily she told me naught, but kept her
secret till she died of her love longings for thee; but when she
died I was with her and she opened her eyes and said to me; 'O
wife of my uncle may Allah hold thy son guiltless of my blood and
punish him not for what he hath done by me!  And now Allah
transporteth me from the house of the world which is perishable
to the house of the other world which is eternal.' Said I, 'O my
daughter, Allah preserve thee and preserve thy youth!' And as I
questioned her of the cause of her illness, she made me no
answer; but she smiled and said, 'O wife of my uncle, bid thy
son, whenever he would go whither he goeth every day, repeat
these two saws at his going away; 'Faith is fair!  Unfaith is
foul!' For this is of my tender affection to him, that I am
solicitous concerning him during my lifetime and after my death.'
Then she gave me somewhat for thee and sware me that I would not
give it until I see thee weeping for her and lamenting her death. 
The thing is with me; and, when I have seen thy case as I have
said, I will make it over to thee." "Show it me," cried I: but
she would not.  Then I gave myself up to love delights and
thought no more of my cousin's death: for my mind was unsettled
and fain would I have been with my lover the livelong day and
night. [FN#519]  So hardly had I perceived the darkness fall when
I betook myself to the garden, where I found the young lady
sitting on coals of fire for much impatience.  As soon as she was
sure that she saw me, she ran to me and throwing her arms about
my neck, enquired of the daughter of my uncle.  I replied, "Sooth
to say she is dead, and we have caused Zikr- litanies and
recitations of the Koran to be performed for her; and it is now
four nights and this be the fifth since she is gone." When she
heard that, she shrieked aloud and wept and said, "Did I not tell
thee that thou hast slain her?  Hadst thou let me know of her
before her death, I would have requited her the kindness she did
me, in that she served me and united thee to me; for without her,
we had never foregathered, we twain, and I fear lest some
calamity befal thee because of thy sin against her." Quoth I,
"She acquitted me of offence ere she died;" and I repeated to her
what my mother had told me.  Quoth she, "Allah upon thee!  when
thou returnest to thy mother, learn what thing she keepeth for
thee." I rejoined, "My mother also said to me; 'Before the
daughter of thy uncle died, she laid a charge upon me, saying,
Whenever thy son would go whither he is wont to go, teach him
these two saws, 'Faith is fair; Unfaith is foul!' " When my lady
heard this she exclaimed, "The mercy of Almighty Allah be upon
her!  Indeed, she hath delivered thee from me, for I minded to do
thee a mischief, but now I will not harm thee nor trouble thee."
I wondered at this and asked her, "What then west thou minded to
do with me in time past and we two being in bond of love?"
Answered she, "Thou art infatuated with me; for thou art young in
life and a raw laddie; thy heart is void of guile and thou
weetest not our malice and deceit.  Were she yet alive, she would
protect thee; for she is the cause of thy preservation and she
hath delivered thee from destruction.  And now I charge thee
speak not with any woman, neither accost one of our sex, be she
young or be she old; and again I say Beware!  for thou art simple
and raw and knowest not the wiles of women and their malice, and
she who interpreted the signs to thee is dead.  And indeed I fear
for thee, lest thou fall into some disgrace and find none to
deliver thee from it, now that the daughter of thy uncle is no
more."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Twenty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
merchant continued to Taj al-Muluk: "Then the young lady said to
me, "I fear for thee lest thou fall into some disgrace and find
none to deliver thee from it.  Alas for thy cousin and ah, the
pity of her!  Would I had known her before her death, that I
might have requited by waiting upon her the fair service she did
me.  The mercy of Allah Almighty be upon her, for she kept her
secret and revealed not what she suffered, and but for her thou
hadst never foregathered with me; no, never!  But there is one
thing I desire of thee." I asked, "What is it?"; and she
answered, "It is that thou bring me to her grave, that I may
visit her in the tomb wherein she is and write some couplets
thereon." I rejoined, "To morrow, if Allah please!" [FN#520]  I
slept with her that night, and she ceased not saying after every
hour, "Would thou hadst told me of thy cousin before her death!"
And I asked her, "What is the meaning of the two saws she taught
me?  'Faith is fair!  Unfaith is foul!'" But she made no answer. 
As soon as it was day she rose and, taking a purse of gold
pieces, said to me, "Come, show me her tomb, that I may visit it
and grave some verses thereon and build a dome over it and
commend her to Allah's mercy and bestow these diners in alms for
her soul." I replied, "To hear is to obey!"; and walked on before
her, whilst she followed me, giving alms as she went and saying
to all upon whom she lavisht bounty, "This is an alms for the
soul of Azizah, who kept her counsel till she drank the cup of
death and never told the secret of her love." And she stinted not
thus to give alms and say, "for Azizah's soul," till the purse
was empty and we came to the grave.  And when she looked at the
tomb, she wept and threw herself on it; then, pulling out a
chisel of steel and a light hammer, she graved therewith upon the
head stone in fine small characters these couplets,

"I past by a broken tomb amid a garth right sheen, * Whereon
     seven blooms of Nu'uman [FN#521] glowed with cramoisie;
Quoth I, 'Who sleepeth in this tomb?' Quoth answering Earth *
     'Before a lover Hades-tombed [FN#522] bend reverently!'
Quoth I, 'May Allah help thee, O thou slain of Love, * And grant
     thee home in Heaven and Paradise height to see!'
Hapless are lovers all e'en tombed in their tombs, * Where amid
     living folk the dust weighs heavily!
Pain would I plant a garden blooming round thy grave, * And water
     every flower with tear drops flowing free!"

Then she turned away in tears and I with her and returned to the
garden where she said to me, "By Allah!  I conjure thee never
leave me!" "To hear is to obey," replied I.  Then I gave myself
wholly up to her and paid her frequent visits: she was good and
generous to me; and as often as I passed the night with her, she
would make much of me and would ask me of the two saws my cousin
Azizah told my mother and I would repeat them to her.  And
matters ceased not to be on this wise and I continued for a whole
year eating and drinking and enjoying dalliance and wearing
change of rich raiment until I waxed gross and fat, so that I
lost all thought of sorrowing and mourning, and I clean forgot my
cousin Azizah.  And on New Year's day I went to the bath, where I
refreshed myself and put on a suit of sumptuous clothes; then
coming out I drank a cup of wine and smelt the scent of my new
gear which was perfumed with various essences; and my breast was
broadened thereby, for I knew not the tricks of Pate nor the
changing ways of Time.  When the hour of night prayer came, I was
minded to repair to my lover; but, being the worse for wine, I
knew not when going to her whither I went, so my drunkenness
turned me into a by street called Syndic Street; [FN#523] and the
while I walked up that street behold, I caught sight of an old
woman faring with a lighted taper in one hand, and in the other a
folded letter.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Twenty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
merchant, whose name was Aziz, continued to Taj al-Muluk:--And
when I entered the street called Syndic Street behold, I caught
sight of an old woman walking with a lighted taper in one hand
and in the other a folded letter and I drew near her and lo!  she
was weeping and repeating these couplets,

"O glad news bearer well come!  Welcome!  Hail!  * How sweet thy
     speech to me, what treat thy tale:
O messenger from him whose weal I love, * God bless thee long as
     breathes soft morning-gale!"

Now when she saw me she asked, "O my son! canst thou read?"; and
I answered, of my officiousness, "Yes, old naunty!" Rejoined she,
"Then take this letter and read it to me." And when she handed it
to me, I took it and unfolding it read it to her and behold it
was from an absent man to his friends and lovers whom he greeted;
and, when she heard its purport, she rejoiced at the good tidings
and blessed me, saying, "Allah dispel thine anxiety, even as thou
hast dispelled mine!" Then she took the letter and walked on. 
Meanwhile, I was urged by a call of nature and sat down on my
heels to make water. [FN#524] When I had ended I stood up and
wiped the orifice with a pebble and then, letting down my
clothes, I was about to wend my way, when suddenly the old woman
came up to me again and, bending down over my hand, kissed it and
said, "O my master!  the Lord give thee joy of thy youth!  I
entreat thee to walk with me a few steps as far as yonder door,
for I told them what thou didst read to me of the letter, and
they believe me not, so come with me two steps and read them the
letter from behind the door and accept the prayers of a righteous
woman." I enquired, "What is the history of this letter?", and
she replied, "O my son, this letter is from my son, who hath been
absent for a term of ten years.  He set out with a stock of
merchandise and tarried long in foreign parts, till we lost hope
of him and supposed him to be dead.  Now after all that delay
cometh this letter from him, and he hath a sister who weepeth for
him night and day; so I said to her, 'He is well and all right.'
But she will not believe me and declares, 'There is no help but
thou bring me one who will read this letter in my presence, that
my heart may be at rest and my mind at ease.' Thou knowest, O my
son, that all who love are wont to think evil: so be good enough
to go with me and read to her this letter, standing behind the
curtain, whilst I call his sister to listen within the door, so
shalt thou dispel our heed and fulfil our need.  Verily quoth the
Apostle of Allah (whom Allah bless and preserve!), 'Whoso easeth
the troubled of one of the troubles of this troublous world,
Allah will ease him of an hundred troubles'; and according to
another tradition, 'Whoso easeth his brother of one of the
troubles of this troublous world, Allah shall relieve him of
seventy and two troubles on the Day of Resurrection.' And I have
betaken myself to thee; so disappoint me not." Replied I, "To
hear is to obey: do thou go before me!" So she walked on
devancing me and I followed her a little way, till she came to
the gate of a large and handsome mansion whose door was plated
with copper. [FN#525]  I stood behind the door, whilst the old
woman cried out in Persian, and ere I knew it a damsel ran up
with light and nimble step.  She had tucked up her trousers to
her knees, so that I saw a pair of calves that confounded thinker
and lighter, and the maid herself was as saith the poet
describing her,

"O thou who barest leg calf, better to suggest * For passion
     madded amourist better things above!
Towards its lover cloth the bowl go round and run; * Cup [FN#526]
     and cup bearer only drive us daft with love." [FN#527]

Now these legs were like two pillars of alabaster adorned with
anklets of gold, wherein were set stones of price.  And the
damsel had tucked up the end of her gown under her arm pit and
had rolled up her sleeves to the elbow, so that I could see her
white wrists whereon were two pairs of bracelets with clasps of
great pearls; and round her neck was a collar of costly gems. 
Her ears were adorned with pendants of pearls and on her head she
wore a kerchief [FN#528] of brocade, brand new and broidered with
jewels of price.  And she had thrust the skirt of her shift into
her trousers string being busy with some household business.  So
when I saw her in this undress, I was confounded at her beauty,
for she was like a shining sun.  Then she said, with soft, choice
speech, never heard I sweeter, "O my mother!  is this he who
cometh to read the letter?" "It is," replied the old woman; and
she put out her hand to me with the letter.  Now between her and
the door was a distance of about half a rod [FN#529]; so I
stretched forth my hand to take the letter from her and thrust
head and shoulders within the door, thinking to draw near her and
read the letter when, before I knew what her design was, the old
woman butted her head against my back and pushed me forwards with
the letter in my hand, so that ere I could take thought I found
myself in the middle of the hall far beyond the vestibule.  Then
she entered, faster than a flash of blinding leven, and had
naught to do but to shut the door.  And Shahrazed perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Twenty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the youth
Aziz pursued to Taj al Muluk: "When the old woman pushed me
forwards I found myself, ere I could think, inside the vestibule;
and the old woman entered faster than a flash of blinding levee
and had naught to do but to shut the door.  When the girl saw me
in the vestibule, she came up to me and strained me to her bosom,
and threw me to the floor; then she sat astraddle upon my breast
and kneaded my belly with her fingers, till I well nigh lost my
senses.  Thereupon she took me by the hand and led me, unable to
resist for the violence of her pressure, through seven
vestibules, whilst the old woman forewent us with the lighted
candle, till we came to a great saloon with four estrades whereon
a horseman might play Polo. [FN#530] Here she released me, saying,
"Open thine eyes." So I opened them still giddy for the excess of
her embracing and pressing, and saw that the whole saloon was
built of the finest marbles and alabasters, and all its furniture
was of silk and brocade even to the cushions and mattresses. 
Therein also were two benches of yellow brass and a couch of red
gold, set with pearls and precious stones, befitting none save
Kings like thyself.  And off the saloon were smaller sitting
rooms; and the whole place was redolent of wealth.  Then she
asked, "O Aziz, which is liefer to thee life or death?" "Life,"
answered I; and she said, "If life be liefer to thee, marry me."
Quoth I, "Indeed I should hate to marry the like of thee." Quoth
she, "If thou marry me thou wilt at least be safe from the
daughter of Dalilah the Wily One." [FN#531]  I asked, "And who be
that daughter of the Wily One?" Whereupon she laughed and
replied, " 'Tis she who hath companied with thee this day for a
year and four months (may the Almighty destroy and afflict her
with one worse than herself!) By Allah, there liveth not a more
perfidious than she.  How many men hath she not slain before thee
and what deeds hath she not done.  Nor can I understand how thou
hast been all the time in her company, yet she hath not killed
thee nor done thee a mischief." When I heard her words, I
marvelled with exceeding marvel and said, "O my lady, who made
thee to know her?"  Said she, "I know her as the age knoweth its
calamities; but now I would fain have thee tell me all that hath
passed between you two, that I may ken the cause of thy
deliverance from her." So I told her all that had happened
between us, including the story of my cousin Azizah.  She
expressed her pity when she heard of the death, and her eyes ran
over with tears and she claps hand on hand and cried out, Her
youth was lost on Allah's way, [FN#532] and may the Lord bless
thee for her good works!  By Allah, O Aziz, she who died for thee
was the cause of thy preservation from the daughter of Dalia the
Wily; and, but for her, thou hadst been lost.  And now she is
dead I fear for thee from the Crafty One's perfidy and mischief;
but my throat is choking and I cannot speak." Quoth I Ay, by
Allah: all this happened even as thou sayest." And she shook her
head and cried, "There liveth not this day the like of Azizah.  I
continued, "And on her death bed she bade me repeat to my lover
these two saws, 'Faith is fair!  Unfaith is foul'" When she heard
me say this, she exclaimed, "O Aziz, by Allah those same words
saved thee from dying by her hand; and now my heart is at ease
for thee from her, for she will never kill thee and the daughter
of thy uncle preserved thee during her lifetime and after her
death.  By Allah, I have desired thee day after day but could not
get at thee till this time when I tricked thee and outwitted
thee; for thou art a raw youth [FN#533] and knowest not the wiles
of young women nor the deadly guile of old women." Rejoined I,
No, by Allah!" Then said she to me, "Be of good cheer and eyes
clear; the dead hath found Allah's grace, and the live shall be
in good case.  Thou art a handsome youth and I do not desire thee
but according to the ordinance of Allah and His Apostle (on whom
be salutation and salvation!).  Whatever thou requirest of money
and stuff, thou shalt have forthright without stint, and I will
not impose any toil on thee, no, never!, for there is with me
always bread baked hot and water in pot.  All I need of thee is
that thou do with me even as the cock doth." I asked "And what
doth the cock?" Upon this she laughed and clapped her hands and
fell over on her back for excess of merriment then she sat up and
smiled and said, "O light of my eyes, really dost thou not know
what cock's duty is?" "No, by Allah!" replied I, and she, "The
cock's duty is to eat and drink and tread.' I was abashed at her
words and asked, "Is that the cock's duty?  Yes, answered she;
"and all I ask of thee now is to gird thy loins and strengthen
thy will and futter thy best." Then she clapped her hands and
cried out, saying, "O my mother, bring forward those who are with
thee." And behold, in came the old woman accompanied by four
lawful witnesses, and carrying a veil of silk.  Then she lighted
four candles, whilst the witnesses saluted me and sat down; and
the girl veiled herself with the veil and deputed one of them to
execute the contract on her behalf.  So they wrote out the
marriage bond and she testified to have received the whole sum
settled upon her, both the half in advance and the half in
arrears; and that she was indebted to me in the sum of ten
thousand dirhams.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Twenty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the young
merchant continued to Taj al-Muluk: When they wrote out the
marriage contract, she testified to having received the whole sum
settled upon her, the half in advance and the half in arrears and
that she was indebted to me in the sum of ten thousand dirhams. 
She paid the witnesses their wage and they withdrew whence they
came.  Thereupon she arose and cast off her clothes and stood in
a chemise of fine silk edged with gold lace, after which she took
off her trousers and seized my hand and led me up to the couch,
saying, "There is no sin in a lawful put in." She lay down on the
couch outspread upon her back; and, drawing me on to her breast,
heaved a sigh and followed it up with a wriggle by way of being
coy.  Then she pulled up the shift above her breasts, and when I
saw her in this pose, I could not withhold myself from thrusting
it into her, after I had sucked her lips, whilst she whimpered
and shammed shame and wept when no tears came, and then said she,
"O my beloved, do it, and do thy best!" Indeed the case reminded
me of his saying, who said,

"When I drew up her shift from the roof of her coynte, * I found
     it as strait* as my mind and my money:
So I drove it half-way, and she sighed a loud sigh * Quoth I,
     'Why this sigh?': 'For the rest of it, honey!'"

And she repeated, "O my beloved, let the finish be made for I am
thine handmaid.  My life on thee, up with it!  give it me, all of
it!  that I may take it in my hand and thrust it into my very
vitals!" And she ceased not to excite me with sobs and sighs and
amorous cries in the intervals of kissing and clasping until amid
our murmurs of pleasure we attained the supreme delight and the
term we had in sight.  We slept together till the morning, when I
would have gone out; but lo!  she came up to me, laughing, and
said, "So! So! thinkest thou that going into the Hammam is the
same as going out? [FN#534]  Dost thou deem me to be the like of
the daughter of Dalilah the Wily One?  Beware of such a thought,
for thou art my husband by contract and according to law.  If
thou be drunken return to thy right mind, and know that the house
wherein thou art openeth but one day in every year.  Go down and
look at the great door." So I arose and went down and found the
door locked and nailed up and returned and told her of the
locking and nailing.  "O Aziz," said she, "We have in this house
flour, grain, fruits and pomegranates; sugar, meat, sheep,
poultry and so forth enough for many years; and the door will not
be opened till after the lapse of a whole twelvemonth and well I
weet thou shalt not find thyself without this house till then."
Quoth I "There is no Majesty, and there is no Might save in
Allah, the Glorious, the Great!" "And how can this harm thee,"
rejoined she; "seeing thou knowest cock's duty, whereof I told
thee?" Then she laughed and I laughed too, and I conformed to
what she said and abode with her, doing cock's duty and eating
and drinking and futtering for a year of full twelve months,
during which time she conceived by me, and I was blessed with a
babe by her.  On the New Year's day I heard the door opened and
behold, men came in with cakes and flour and sugar.  Upon this, I
would have gone out but my wife said, "Wait till supper tide and
go out even as thou camest in." So I waited till the hour of
night prayer and was about to go forth in fear and trembling,
when she stopped me, saying, "By Allah, I will not let thee go
until thou swear to come back this night before the closing of
the door." I agreed to this, and she swore me a solemn oath on
Blade and Book, [FN#535] and the oath of divorce to boot, that I
would return to her.  Then I left her and going straight to the
garden, found the door open as usual; where at I was angry and
said to myself, "I have been absent this whole year and come here
unawares and find the place open as of wont!  I wonder is the
damsel still here as before?  I needs must enter and see before I
go to my mother, more by reason that it is now nightfall." So I
entered the flower garden,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.


When it was the One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth Night

Shahrazad continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that
Aziz pursued to Taj al-Muluk: Then I entered the flower garden
and made for the pavilion, where I found the daughter of Dalilah
the Wily One, sitting with head on knee and hand to cheek.  Her
colour was changed and her eyes were sunken; but, when she saw
me, she exclaimed, "Praised be Allah for thy safety!" And she was
minded to rise but fell down for joy.  I was abashed before her
and hung my head; presently, however, I went up to her and kissed
her and asked, "How knewest thou that I should come to thee this
very night?" She answered, "I knew it not!  By Allah, this whole
year past I have not tasted the taste of sleep, but have watched
through every night, expecting thee; and such hath been my case
since the day thou wentest out from me and I gave thee the new
suit of clothes, and thou promisedst me to go to the Hammam and
to come back!  So I sat awaiting thee that night and a second
night and a third night; but thou camest not till after so great
delay, and I ever expecting thy coming; for this is lovers' way. 
And now I would have thee tell me what hath been the cause of
thine absence from me the past year long?" So I told her.  And
when she knew that I was married, her colour waxed yellow, and I
added, "I have come to thee this night but I must leave thee
before day." Quoth she, "Doth it not suffice her that she tricked
thee into marrying her and kept thee prisoner with her a whole
year, but she must also make thee swear by the oath of divorce,
that thou wilt return to her on the same night before morning,
and not allow thee to divert thyself with thy mother or me, nor
suffer thee to pass one night with either of us, away from her? 
How then must it be with one from whom thou hast been absent a
full year, and I knew thee before she did?  But Allah have mercy
on thy cousin Azizah, for there befel her what never befel any
and she bore what none other ever bore and she died by thy ill
usage; yet 'twas she who protected thee against me.  Indeed, I
thought thou didst love me, so I let thee take thine own way;
else had I not suffered thee to go safe in a sound skin, when I
had it in my power to clap thee in jail and even to slay thee."
Then she wept with sore weeping and waxed wroth and shuddered in
my face with skin bristling [FN#1] and looked at me with furious
eyes.  When I saw her in this case I was terrified at her and my
side muscles trembled and quivered, for she was like a dreadful
she Ghul, an ogress in ire, and I like a bean over the fire. 
Then said she, "Thou art of no use to me, now thou art married
and hast a child; nor art thou any longer fit for my company; I
care only for bachelors and not for married men: [FN#2] these
profit us nothing Thou hast sold me for yonder stinking armful;
but, by Allah, I will make the whore's heart ache for thee, and
thou shalt not live either for me or for her!" Then she cried a
loud cry and, ere I could think, up came the slave girls and
threw me on the ground; and when I was helpless under their hands
she rose and, taking a knife, said, "I will cut thy throat as
they slaughter he goats; and that will be less than thy desert,
for thy doings to me and the daughter of thy uncle before me."
When I looked to my life and found myself at the mercy of her
slave women, with my cheeks dust soiled, and saw her sharpen the
knife, I made sure of death.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Twenty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Dandan thus continued his tale to Zau al-Makan: Then quoth the
youth Aziz to Taj al-Muluk, Now when I found my life at the mercy
of her slave women with my cheeks dust soiled, and I saw her
sharpen the knife, I made sure of death and cried out to her for
mercy.  But she only redoubled in ferocity and ordered the slave
girls to pinion my hands behind me, which they did; and, throwing
me on my back, she seated herself on my middle and held down my
head.  Then two of them came up and squatted on my shin bones,
whilst other two grasped my hands and arms; and she summoned a
third pair and bade them beat me.  So they beat me till I fainted
and my voice failed.  When I revived, I said to myself, " 'Twere
easier and better for me to have my gullet slit than to be beaten
on this wise!" And I remembered the words of my cousin, and how
she used to say to me, "Allah, keep thee from her mischief!"; and
I shrieked and wept till my voice failed and I remained without
power to breathe or to move.  Then she again whetted the knife
and said to the slave girls, "Uncover him." Upon this the Lord
inspired me to repeat to her the two phrases my cousin had taught
me, and had bequeathed to me, and I said, "O my lady, dost thou
not know that Faith is fair, Unfaith is foul?" When she heard
this, she cried out and said, "Allah pity thee, Azizah, and give
thee Paradise in exchange for thy wasted youth!  By Allah, of a
truth she served thee in her life time and after her death, and
now she hath saved thee alive out of my hands with these two
saws.  Nevertheless, I cannot by any means leave thee thus, but
needs must I set my mark on thee, to spite yonder brazen faced
piece, who hath kept thee from me." There upon she called out to
the slave women and bade them bind my feet with cords and then
said to them, "Take seat on him!" They did her bidding, upon
which she arose and fetched a pan of copper and hung it over the
brazier and poured into it oil of sesame, in which she fried
cheese. [FN#3] Then she came up to me (and I still insensible)
and, unfastening my bag trousers, tied a cord round my testicles
and, giving it to two of her women, bade them trawl at it.  They
did so, and I swooned away and was for excess of pain in a world
other than this.  Then she came with a razor of steel and cut off
my member masculine, [FN#4] so that I remained like a woman: after
which she seared the wound with the boiling and rubbed it with a
powder, and I the while unconscious.  Now when I came to myself,
the blood had stopped; so she bade the slave girls unbind me and
made me drink a cup of wine.  Then said she to me, "Go now to her
whom thou hast married and who grudged me a single night, and the
mercy of Allah be on thy cousin Azizah, who saved thy life and
never told her secret love!  Indeed, haddest thou not repeated
those words to me, I had surely slit thy weasand.  Go forth this
instant to whom thou wilt, for I needed naught of thee save what
I have just cut off; and now I have no part in thee, nor have I
any further want of thee or care for thee.  So begone about thy
business and rub thy head [FN#5] and implore mercy for the
daughter of thine uncle!" Thereupon she kicked me with her foot
and I rose, hardly able to walk; and I went, little by little,
till I came to the door of our house.  I saw it was open, so I
threw myself within it and fell down in a fainting fit; whereupon
my wife came out and lifting me up, carried me into the saloon
and assured herself that I had become like a woman.  Then I fell
into a sleep and a deep sleep; and when I awoke, I found myself
thrown down at the garden gate,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was the One Hundred and Twenty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Dandan pursued to King Zau al-Makan, The youth Aziz thus
continued his story to Taj al-Muluk: When I awoke and found
myself thrown down at the garden gate, I rose, groaning for pain
and misery, and made my way to our home and entering, I came upon
my mother weeping for me, and saying, "Would I knew, O my son, in
what land art thou?" So I drew near and threw myself upon her,
and when she looked at me and felt me, she knew that I was ill;
for my face was coloured black and tan.  Then I thought of my
cousin and all the kind offices she had been wont to do me, and I
learned when too late that she had truly loved me; so I wept for
her and my mother wept also Presently she said to me, "O my son,
thy sire is dead." At this my fury against Fate redoubled, and I
cried till I fell into a fit.  When I came to myself, I looked at
the place where my cousin Azizah had been used to sit and shed
tears anew, till I all but fainted once more for excess of
weeping; and I ceased not to cry and sob and wail till midnight,
when my mother said to me, "Thy father hath been dead these ten
days." "I shall never think of any one but my cousin Azizah,"
replied I; "and indeed I deserve all that hath befallen me, for
that I neglected her who loved me with love so dear." Asked she,
"What hath befallen thee?" So I told her all that had happened
and she wept awhile, then she rose and set some matter of meat
and drink before me.  I ate a little and drank, after which I
repeated my story to her, and told her the whole occurrence;
whereupon she exclaimed, "Praised be Allah, that she did but this
to thee and forbore to slaughter thee!" Then she nursed me and
medicined me till I regained my health; and, when my recovery was
complete, she said to me, "O my son, I will now bring out to thee
that which thy cousin committed to me in trust for thee; for it
is thine.  She swore me not to give it thee, till I should see
thee recalling her to mind and weeping over her and thy
connection severed from other than herself; and now I know that
these conditions are fulfilled in thee." So she arose, and
opening a chest, took out this piece of linen, with the figures
of gazelles worked thereon, which I had given to Azizah in time
past; and taking it I found written therein these couplets,

"Lady of beauty, say, who taught thee hard and harsh design, * 
     To slay with longing Love's excess this hapless lover thine?
An thou fain disremember me beyond our parting day, * Allah will
     know, that thee and thee my memory never shall tyne.
Thou blamest me with bitter speech yet sweetest 'tis to me; *
     Wilt generous be and deign one day to show of love a sign?
I had not reckoned Love contained so much of pine and pain; * 
     And soul distress until I came for thee to pain and pine
Never my heart knew weariness, until that eve I fell * In love
     wi' thee, and prostrate fell before those glancing eyne!
My very foes have mercy on my case and moan therefor; * But thou,
     O heart of Indian steel, all mercy dost decline.
No, never will I be consoled, by Allah, an I die, * Nor yet
     forget the love of thee though life in ruins lie!"

When I read these couplets, I wept with sore weeping and buffeted
my face; then I unfolded the scroll, and there fell from it an
other paper.  I opened it and behold, I found written therein,
'Know, O son of my uncle, that I acquit thee of my blood and I
beseech Allah to make accord between thee and her whom thou
lovest; but if aught befal thee through the daughter of Dalilah
the Wily, return thou not to her neither resort to any other
woman and patiently bear thine affliction, for were not thy fated
life tide a long life, thou hadst perished long ago; but praised
be Allah who hath appointed my death day before thine!  My peace
be upon thee; preserve this cloth with the gazelles herein
figured and let it not leave thee, for it was my companion when
thou was absent from me;"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Twenty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Dandan pursued to King Zau al-Makan, And the youth Aziz continued
to Taj al-Muluk: So I read what my cousin had written and the
charge to me which was, "Preserve this cloth with the gazelles
and let it not leave thee, for it was my companion when thou west
absent from me and, Allah upon thee!  if thou chance to fall in
with her who worked these gazelles, hold aloof from her and do
not let her approach thee nor marry her; and if thou happen not
on her and find no way to her, look thou consort not with any of
her sex.  Know that she who wrought these gazelles worketh every
year a gazelle cloth and despatcheth it to far countries, that
her report and the beauty of her broidery, which none in the
world can match, may be bruited abroad.  As for thy beloved, the
daughter of Dalilah the Wily, this cloth came to her hand, and
she used to ensnare folk with it, showing it to them and saying,
'I have a sister who wrought this.' But she lied in so saying,
Allah rend her veil!  This is my parting counsel; and I have not
charged thee with this charge, but because I know [FN#6] that
after my death the world will be straitened on thee and, haply,
by reason of this, thou wilt leave thy native land and wander in
foreign parts, and hearing of her who wrought these figures, thou
mayest be minded to fore gather with her.  Then wilt thou
remember me, when the memory shall not avail thee; nor wilt thou
know my worth till after my death.  And, lastly, learn that she
who wrought the gazelles is the daughter of the King of the
Camphor Islands and a lady of the noblest." Now when I had read
that scroll and understood what was written therein, I fell again
to weeping, and my mother wept because I wept, and I ceased not
to gaze upon it and to shed tears till night fall.  I abode in
this condition a whole year, at the end of which the merchants,
with whom I am in this cafilah, prepared to set out from my
native town; and my mother counseled me to equip myself and
journey with them, so haply I might be consoled and my sorrow be
dispelled, saying, "Take comfort and put away from thee this
mourning and travel for a year or two or three, till the caravan
return, when perhaps thy breast may be broadened and thy heart
heartened." And she ceased not to persuade me with endearing
words, till I provided myself with merchandise and set out with
the caravan.  But all the time of my wayfaring, my tears have
never dried; no, never!  and at every halting place where we
halt, I open this piece of linen and look on these gazelles and
call to mind my cousin Azizah and weep for her as thou hast seen;
for indeed she loved me with dearest love and died, oppressed by
my unlove.  I did her nought but ill and she did me nought but
good.  When these merchants return from their journey, I shall
return with them, by which time I shall have been absent a whole
year: yet hath my sorrow waxed greater and my grief and
affliction were but increased by my visit to the Islands of
Camphor and the Castle of Crystal.  Now these islands are seven
in number and are ruled by a King, by name Shahriman, [FN#7] who
hath a daughter called Dunya; [FN#8] and I was told that it was
she who wrought these gazelles and that this piece in my
possession was of her embroidery.  When I knew this, my yearning
redoubled and I burnt with the slow fire of pining and was
drowned in the sea of sad thought; and I wept over myself for
that I was become even as a woman, without manly tool like other
men, and there was no help for it.  From the day of my quitting
the Camphor Islands, I have been tearful eyed and heavy hearted,
and such hath been my case for a long while and I know not
whether it will be given me to return to my native land and die
beside my mother or not; for I am sick from eating too much of
the world.  Thereupon the young merchant wept and groaned and
complained and gazed upon the gazelles; whilst the tears rolled
down his cheeks in streams and he repeated these two couplets,

"Joy needs shall come," a prattler 'gan to prattle: * 
     "Needs cease thy blame!" I was commoved to rattle:
'In time,' quoth he: quoth I ' 'Tis marvellous!  * 
     Who shall ensure my life, O cold of tattle!'" [FN#9]

And he repeated also these,

"Well Allah weets that since our severance day * 
     I've wept till forced to ask of tears a loan:
'Patience!  (the blamer cries): thou'lt have her yet!' *
     Quoth I, 'O blamer where may patience wone?'"

Then said he, "This, O King!  is my tale: hast thou ever heard
one stranger?" So Taj al-Muluk marvelled with great marvel at the
young merchant's story, and fire darted into his entrails on
hearing the name of the Lady Dunya and her loveliness.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Twenty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Dandan continued to Zau al-Makan: Now when Taj al-Muluk heard the
story of the young merchant, he marvelled with great marvel and
fire darted into his entrails on hearing the name of the Lady
Dunya who, as he knew, had embroidered the gazelles; and his love
and longing hourly grew, so he said to the youth, "By Allah, that
hath befallen thee whose like never befel any save thyself, but
thou hast a life term appointed, which thou must fulfil; and now
I would fain ask of thee a question." Quoth Aziz, "And what is
it?" Quoth he, "Wilt thou tell me how thou sawest the young lady
who wrought these gazelles?" Then he, "O my lord, I got me access
to her by a sleight and it was this.  When I entered her city
with the caravan, I went forth and wandered about the garths till
I came to a flower garden abounding in trees, whose keeper was a
venerable old man, a Shaykh stricken in years.  I addressed him,
saying, 'O ancient sir, whose may be this garden?' and he
replied, 'It belongs to the King's daughter, the Lady Dunya.  We
are now beneath her palace and, when she is minded to amuse
herself, she openeth the private wicket and walketh in the garden
and smelleth the fragrance of the flowers.' So I said to him,
'Favour me by allowing me to sit in this garden till she come;
haply I may enjoy a sight of her as she passeth.' The Shaykh
answered, 'There can be no harm in that.' Thereupon I gave him a
dirham or so and said to him, Buy us something to eat.' He took
the money gladly and opened door and, entering himself, admitted
me into the garden, where we strolled and ceased not strolling
till we reached a pleasant spot in which he bade me sit down and
await his going and his returning.  Then he brought me somewhat
of fruit and, leaving me, disappeared for an hour; but after a
while he returned to me bringing a roasted lamb, of which we ate
till we had eaten enough, my heart yearning the while for a sight
of the lady.  Presently, as we sat, the postern opened and the
keeper said to me, 'Rise and hide thee.' I did so; and behold, a
black eunuch put his head out through the garden wicket and
asked, 'O Shaykh, there any one with thee?' 'No,' answered he;
and the eunuch said, 'Shut the garden gate.' So the keeper shut
the gate, and lo!  the Lady Dunya came in by the private door. 
When I saw her, methought the moon had risen above the horizon
and was shining; I looked at her a full hour and longed for her
as one athirst longeth for water.  After a while she withdrew and
shut the door; whereupon I left the garden and sought my lodging,
knowing that I could not get at her and that I was no man for
her, more especially as I was become like a woman, having no
manly tool: moreover she was a King's daughter and I but a
merchant man; so; how could I have access to the like of her or--
to any other woman?  Accordingly, when these my companions made
ready for the road, I also made preparation and set out with
them, and we journeyed towards this city till we arrived at the
place ere we met with thee.  Thou askedst me and I have answered;
and these are my adventures and peace be with thee!" Now when Taj
al-Muluk heard that account, fires raged in his bosom and his
heart and thought were occupied love for the Lady Dunya; and
passion and longing were sore upon him.  Then he arose and
mounted horse and, taking Aziz with him, returned to his father's
capital, where he settled him in a separate house and supplied
him with all he needed in the way of meat and drink and dress. 
Then he left him and returned to his palace, with the tears
trickling down his cheeks, for hearing oftentimes standeth
instead of seeing and knowing. [FN#10]  And he ceased not to be in
this state till his father came in to him and finding him wan
faced, lean of limb and tearful eyed, knew that something had
occurred to chagrin him and said, "O my son, acquaint me with thy
case and tell me what hath befallen thee, that thy colour is
changed and thy body is wasted.  So he told him all that had
passed and what tale he had heard of Aziz and the account of the
Princess Dunya; and how he had fallen in love of her on hearsay,
without having set eyes on her.  Quoth his sire, "O my son, she
is the daughter of a King whose land is far from ours: so put
away this thought and go in to thy mother's palace."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

        When it was the One Hundred and Thirtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Dandan continued to Zau al-Makan: And the father of Taj al-Muluk
spake to him on this wise, "O my son, her father is a King whose
land is far from ours: so put away this thought and go into thy
mother's palace where are five hundred maidens like moons, and
whichsoever of them pleaseth thee, take her; or else we will seek
for thee in marriage some one of the King's daughters, fairer
than the Lady Dunya." Answered Taj al-Muluk, "O my father, I
desire none other, for she it is who wrought the gazelles which I
saw, and there is no help but that I have her; else I will flee
into the world and the waste and I will slay myself for her
sake." Then said his father, "Have patience with me, till I send
to her sire and demand her in marriage, and win thee thy wish as
I did for myself with thy mother.  Haply Allah will bring thee to
thy desire; and, if her parent will not consent, I will make his
kingdom quake under him with an army, whose rear shall be with me
whilst its van shall be upon him." Then he sent for the youth
Aziz and asked him, "O my son, tell me dost thou know the way to
the Camphor Islands?" He answered "Yes"; and the King said, "I
desire of thee that thou fare with my Wazir thither." Replied
Aziz, "I hear and I obey, O King of the Age!"; where upon the
King summoned his Minister and said to him, "Devise me some
device, whereby my son's affair may be rightly managed and fare
thou forth to the Camphor Islands and demand of their King his
daughter in marriage for my son, Taj al-Muluk." The Wazir
replied, "Hearkening and obedience." Then Taj al-Muluk returned
to his dwelling place and his love and longing redoubled and the
delay seemed endless to him; and when the night darkened around
him, he wept and sighed and complained and repeated this poetry,

"Dark falls the night: my tears unaided rail * And fiercest
     flames of love my heart assail:
Ask thou the nights of me, and they shall tell * An I find aught
     to do but weep and wail:
Night long awake, I watch the stars what while * Pour down my
     cheeks the tears like dropping hail:
And lone and lorn I'm grown with none to aid; * For kith and kin
     the love lost lover fail."

And when he had ended his reciting he swooned away and did not
recover his senses till the morning, at which time there came to
him one of his father's eunuchs and, standing at his head,
summoned him to the King's presence.  So he went with him and his
father, seeing that his pallor had increased, exhorted him to
patience and promised him union with her he loved.  Then he
equipped Aziz and the Wazir and supplied them with presents; and
they set out and fared on day and night till they drew near the
Isles of Camphor, where they halted on the banks of a stream, and
the Minister despatched a messenger to acquaint the King of his
arrival.  The messenger hurried forwards and had not been gone
more than an hour, before they saw the King's Chamberlains and
Emirs advancing towards them, to meet them at a parasang's
distance from the city and escort them into the royal presence. 
They laid their gifts before the King and became his guests for
three days.  And on the fourth day the Wazir rose and going in to
the King, stood between his hands and acquainted him with the
object which induced his visit; whereat he was perplexed for an
answer inasmuch as his daughter misliked men and disliked
marriage.  So he bowed his head groundwards awhile, then raised
it and calling one of his eunuchs, said to him, "Go to thy
mistress, the Lady Dunya, and repeat to her what thou hast heard
and the purport of this Wazir's coming." So the eunuch went forth
and returning after a time, said to the King, "O King of the Age,
when I went in to the Lady Dunya and told her what I had heard,
she was wroth with exceeding wrath and rose at me with a staff
designing to break my head; so I fled from her, and she said to
me 'If my Father force me to wed him, whomsoever I wed I will
slay.' Then said her sire to the Wazir and Aziz, "Ye have heard,
and now ye know all!  So let your King wot of it and give him my
salutations and say that my daughter misliketh men and disliketh
marriage."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Thirty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King
Shahriman thus addressed the Wazir and Aziz, "Salute your King
from me and inform him of what ye have heard, namely that my
daughter misliketh marriage." So they turned away unsuccessful
and ceased not faring on till they rejoined the King and told him
what had passed; whereupon he commanded the chief officers to
summon the troops and get them ready for marching and
campaigning.  But the Wazir said to him, "O my liege Lord, do not
thus: the King is not at fault because, when his daughter learnt
our business, she sent a message saying, 'If my father force me
to wed, whomsoever I wed I will slay and myself after him.' So
the refusal cometh from her." When the King heard his Minister's
words he feared for Taj al-Muluk and said, "Verily if I make war
on the King of the Camphor Islands and carry off his daughter,
she will kill herself and it will avail me naught." Then he told
his son how the case stood, who hearing it said, "O my father, I
cannot live without her; so I will go to her and contrive to get
at her, even though I die in the attempt, and this only will I do
and nothing else." Asked his father, "How wilt thou go to her?"
and he answered, "I will go in the guise of a merchant." [FN#11]
Then said the King, "If thou need must go and there is no help
for it, take with thee the Wazir and Aziz." Then he brought out
money from his treasuries and made ready for his son merchandise
to the value of an hundred thousand dinars.  The two had settled
upon this action; and when the dark hours came Taj al-Muluk and
Aziz went to Aziz's lodgings and there passed that night, and the
Prince was heart smitten, taking no pleasure in food or in sleep;
for melancholy was heavy upon him and he was agitated with
longing for his beloved.  So he besought the Creator that he
would vouch safe to unite him with her and he wept and groaned
and wailed and began versifying,

"Union, this severance ended, shall I see some day?  * Then shall
     my tears this love lorn lot of me portray.
While night all care forgets I only minded thee, * And thou didst
     gar me wake while all forgetful lay."

And when his improvising came to an end, he wept with sore
weeping and Aziz wept with him, for that he remembered his
cousin; and they both ceased not to shed tears till morning
dawned, whereupon Taj al-Muluk rose and went to farewell his
mother, in travelling dress.  She asked him of his case and he
repeated the story to her; so she gave him fifty thousand gold
pieces and bade him adieu; and, as he fared forth, she put up
prayers for his safety and for his union with his lover and his
friends.  Then he betook himself to his father and asked his
leave to depart.  The King granted him permission and, presenting
him with other fifty thousand dinars, bade set up a tent for him
without the city and they pitched a pavilion wherein the
travellers abode two days.  Then all set out on their journey. 
Now Taj al-Muluk delighted in the company of Aziz and said to
him, "O my brother, henceforth I can never part from thee."
Replied Aziz, "And I am of like mind and fain would I die under
thy feet: but, O my brother, my heart is concerned for my
mother." "When we shall have won our wish," said the Prince,
"there will be naught save what is well!" Now the Wazir continued
charging Taj al-Muluk to be patient, whilst Aziz entertained him
every evening with talk and recited poetry to him and diverted
him with histories and anecdotes.  And so they fared on
diligently night and day for two whole months, till the way
became tedious to Taj al-Muluk and the fire of desire redoubled
on him; and he broke out,

"The road is lonesome; grow my grief and need, * While on my
     breast love fires for ever feed:
Goal of my hopes, sole object of my wish!  * By him who moulded
     man from drop o' seed,
I bear such loads of longing for thy love, * Dearest, as weight
     of al Shumm Mounts exceed:
O 'Lady of my World' [FN#12] Love does me die; * No breath of life
     is left for life to plead;
But for the union hope that lends me strength, * My weary limbs
     were weak this way to speed."

When he had finished his verses, he wept (and Aziz wept with him)
from a wounded heart, till the Minister was moved to pity by
their tears and said, "O my lord, be of good cheer and keep thine
eyes clear of tears; there will be naught save what is well!"
Quoth Taj al-Muluk, "O Wazir, indeed I am weary of the length of
the way.  Tell me how far we are yet distant from the city."
Quoth Aziz, "But a little way remaineth to us." Then they
continued their journey, cutting across river vales and plains,
words and stony wastes, till one night, as Taj al-Muluk was
sleeping, he dreamt that his beloved was with him and that he
embraced her and pressed her to his bosom; and he awoke
quivering, shivering with pain, delirious with emotion, and
improvised these verses,

"Dear friend, my tears aye flow these cheeks adown, *
     With longsome pain and pine, my sorrow's crown:
I plain like keening woman child bereft, *
     And as night falls like widow dove I groan:
An blow the breeze from land where thou cost wone, *
     I find o'er sunburnt earth sweet coolness blown.
Peace be wi' thee, my love, while zephyr breathes, *
     And cushat flies and turtle makes her moan."

And when he had ended his versifying, the Wazir came to him and
said, "Rejoice; this is a good sign: so be of good cheer and keep
thine eyes cool and clear, for thou shalt surely compass thy
desire." And Aziz also came to him and exhorted him to patience
and applied himself to divert him, talking with him and telling
him tales.  So they pressed on, marching day and night, other two
months, till there appeared to them one day at sunrise some white
thing in the distance and Taj al-Muluk said to Aziz, "What is
yonder whiteness?" He replied, "O my lord!  yonder is the Castle
of Crystal and that is the city thou seekest." At this the Prince
rejoiced, and they ceased not faring forwards till they drew near
the city and, as they approached it, Taj al-Muluk joyed with
exceeding joy, and his care ceased from him.  They entered in
trader guise, the King's son being habited as a merchant of
importance; and repaired to a great Khan, known as the Merchants'
Lodging.  Quoth Taj al-Muluk to Aziz, "Is this the resort of the
merchants?"; and quoth he, "Yes; 'tis the Khan wherein I lodged
before." So they alighted there and making their baggage camels
kneel, unloaded them and stored their goods in the
warehouses. [FN#13] They abode four days for rest; when the Wazir
advised that they should hire a large house.  To this they
assented and they found them a spacious house, fitted up for
festivities, where they took up their abode, and the Wazir and
Aziz studied to devise some device for Taj al-Muluk, who remained
in a state of perplexity, knowing not what to do.  Now the
Minister could think of nothing but that he should set up as a
merchant on 'Change and in the market of fine stuffs; so he
turned to the Prince and his companion and said to them, "Know ye
that if we tarry here on this wise, assuredly we shall not win
our wish nor attain our aim; but a something occurred to me
whereby (if Allah please!) we shall find our advantage." Replied
Taj al-Muluk and Aziz, "Do what seemeth good to thee, indeed
there is a blessing on the grey beard; more specially on those
who, like thyself, are conversant with the conduct of affairs: so
tell us what occurreth to thy mind." Rejoined the Wazir "It is my
counsel that we hire thee a shop in the stuff bazar, where thou
mayst sit to sell and buy.  Every one, great and small, hath need
of silken stuffs and other cloths; so if thou patiently abide in
thy shop, thine affairs will prosper, Inshallah!  more by token
as thou art comely of aspect.  Make, however, Aziz thy factor and
set him within the shop, to hand thee the pieces of cloth and
stuffs." When Taj al-Muluk heard these words, he said, 'This rede
is right and a right pleasant recking." So he took out a handsome
suit of merchant's weed, and, putting it on, set out for the
bazar, followed by his servants, to one of whom he had given a
thousand dinars, wherewith to fit up the shop.  They ceased not
walking till they came to the stuff market, and when the
merchants saw Taj al-Muluk's beauty and grace, they were
confounded and went about saying, "Of a truth Rizwan [FN#14] hath
opened the gates of Paradise and left them unguarded, so that
this youth of passing comeliness hath come forth." And others,
"Peradventure this is one of the angels." Now when they went in
among the traders they asked for the shop of the Overseer of the
market and the merchants directed them thereto.  So they delayed
not to repair thither and to salute him, and he and those who
were with him rose to them and seated them and made much of them,
because of the Wazir, whom they saw to be a man in years and of
reverend aspect; and viewing the youths Aziz and Taj al-Muluk in
his company, they said to one another, "Doubtless our Shaykh is
the father of these two youths." Then quoth the Wazir, "Who among
you is the Overseer of the market?" "This is he," replied they;
and behold, he came forward and the Wazir observed him narrowly
and saw him to be an old man of grave and dignified carriage,
with eunuchs and servants and black slaves.  The Syndic greeted
them with the greeting of friends and was lavish in his
attentions to them: then he seated them by his side and asked
them, "Have ye any business which we [FN#15] may have the
happiness of transacting?" The Minister answered, "Yes; I am an
old man, stricken in years, and have with me these two youths,
with whom I have travelled through every town and country,
entering no great city without tarrying there a full year, that
they might take their pleasure in viewing it and come to know its
citizens.  Now I have visited your town intending to sojourn here
for a while; so I want of thee a handsome shop in the best
situation, wherein I may establish them, that they may traffic
and learn to buy and sell and give and take, whilst they divert
themselves with the sight of the place, and be come familiar with
the usages of its people." Quoth the Overseer, "There is no harm
in that;" and, looking at the two youths, he was delighted with
them and affected them with a warm affection.  Now he was a great
connoisseur of bewitching glances, preferring the love of boys to
that of girls and inclining to the sour rather than the sweet of
love.  So he said to himself, "This, indeed, is fine game.  Glory
be to Him who created and fashioned them out of vile
water!" [FN#16] and rising stood before them like a servant to do
them honour.  Then he went out and made ready for them a shop
which was in the very midst of the Exchange; nor was there any
larger or better in the bazar, for it was spacious and handsomely
decorated and fitted with shelves of ivory and ebony wood.  After
this he delivered the keys to the Wazir, who was dressed as an
old merchant, saying, "Take them, O my lord, and Allah make it a
blessed abiding place to thy two sons!" The Minister took the
keys and the three returning to the Khan where they had alighted,
bade the servants transport to the shop all their goods and
stuffs.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Thirty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Wazir took the shop keys, he went accompanied by Taj al-Muluk and
Aziz to the Khan, and they bade the servants transport to the
shop all their goods and stuffs and valuables of which they had
great store worth treasures of money.  And when all this was duly
done, they went to the shop and ordered their stock in trade and
slept there that night.  As soon as morning morrowed the Wazir
took the two young men to the Hammam bath where they washed them
clean; and they donned rich dresses and scented themselves with
essences and enjoyed themselves to the utmost.  Now each of the
youths was passing fair to look upon, and in the bath they were
even as saith the poet,

"Luck to the Rubber, whose deft hand o'erdies *
     A frame begotten twixt the lymph and light: [FN#17]
He shows the thaumaturgy of his craft, *
     And gathers musk in form of camphor dight." [FN#18]

After bathing they left; and, when the Overseer heard that they
had gone to the Hammam, he sat down to await the twain, and
presently they came up to him like two gazelles; their cheeks
were reddened by the bath and their eyes were darker than ever;
their faces shone and they were as two lustrous moons or two
branches fruit laden.  Now when he saw them he rose forthright
and said to them, "O my sons, may your bath profit you
always!" [FN#19] Where upon Taj al-Muluk replied, with the
sweetest of speech, "Allah be bountiful to thee, O my father; why
didst thou not come with us and bathe in our company?" Then they
both bent over his right hand and kissed it and walked before him
to the shop, to entreat him honourably and show their respect for
him, for that he was Chief of the Merchants and the market, and
he had done them kindness in giving them the shop.  When he saw
their hips quivering as they moved, desire and longing redoubled
on him; and he puffed and snorted and he devoured them with his
eyes, for he could not contain himself, repeating the while these
two couplets,

"Here the heart reads a chapter of devotion pure; *
     Nor reads dispute if Heaven in worship partner take:
No wonder 'tis he trembles walking 'neath such weight!  *
     How much of movement that revolving sphere must
     make. [FN#20]"

Furthermore he said,

"I saw two charmers treading humble earth.  *
     Two I must love an tread they on mine eyes."

When they heard this, they conjured him to enter the bath with
them a second time.  He could hardly believe his ears and
hastening thither, went in with them.  The Wazir had not yet left
the bath; so when he heard of the Overseer's coming, he came out
and meeting him in the middle of the bath hall invited him to
enter.  He refused, whereupon Taj al-Muluk taking him by the hand
walked on one side and Aziz by the other, and carried him into a
cabinet; and that impure old man submitted to them, whilst his
emotion increased on him.  He would have refused, albeit this was
what he desired; but the Minister said to him, "They are thy
sons; let them wash thee and cleanse thee." "Allah preserve them
to thee!" exclaimed the Overseer, "By Allah your coming and the
coming of those with you bring down blessing and good luck upon
our city!" And he repeated these two couplets,

"Thou camest and green grew the hills anew; *
     And sweetest bloom to the bridegroom threw,
While aloud cried Earth and her earth-borns too *
     'Hail and welcome who comest with grace to endue.'"

They thanked him for this, and Taj al-Muluk ceased not to wash
him and to pour water over him and he thought his soul in
Paradise.  When they had made an end of his service, he blessed
them and sat by the side of the Wazir, talking but gazing the
while on the youths.  Presently, the servants brought them
towels, and they dried themselves and donned their dress.  Then
they went out, and the Minister turned to the Syndic and said to
him, "O my lord!  verily the bath is the Paradise [FN#21] of this
world." Replied the Overseer, "Allah vouchsafe to thee such
Paradise, and health to thy sons and guard them from the evil
eye!  Do ye remember aught that the eloquent have said in praise
of the bath.?" Quoth Taj al-Muluk, "I will repeat for thee a pair
of couplets;" and he recited,

The life of the bath is the joy of man's life, [FN#22] *
     Save that time is short for us there to bide:
A Heaven where irksome it were to stay; *
     A Hell, delightful at entering-tide."

When he ended his recital, quoth Aziz, "And I also remember two
couplets in praise of the bath." The Overseer said, "Let me hear
them," so he repeated the following,

"A house where flowers from stones of granite grow, *
     Seen at its best when hot with living lows:
Thou deem'st it Hell but here, forsooth, is Heaven, *
     And some like suns and moons within it show."

And when he had ended his recital, his verses pleased the
Overseer and he wondered at his words and savoured their grace
and fecundity and said to them, "By Allah, ye possess both beauty
and eloquence.  But now listen to me, you twain!" And he began
chanting, and recited in song the following verses,

"O joy of Hell and Heaven!  whose tormentry *
     Enquickens frame and soul with lively gree:
I marvel so delightsome house to view, *
     And most when 'neath it kindled fires I see:
Sojourn of bliss to visitors, withal *
     Pools on them pour down tears unceasingly."

Then his eye-sight roamed and browsed on the gardens of their
beauty and he repeated these two couplets,

"I went to the house of the keeper-man; *
     He was out, but others to smile began:
I entered his Heaven [FN#23] and then his Hell; [FN#24] *
     And I said 'Bless Malik [FN#25] and bless Rizwan.' " [FN#26]

When they heard these verses they were charmed, and the Over seer
invited them to his house; but they declined and returned to
their own place, to rest from the great heat of the bath.  So
they took their ease there and ate and drank and passed that
night in perfect solace and satisfaction, till morning dawned,
when they arose from sleep and making their lesser ablution,
prayed the dawn- prayer and drank the morning draught. [FN#27] As
soon as the sun had risen and the shops and markets opened, they
arose and going forth from their place to the bazar opened their
shop, which their servants had already furnished, after the
handsomest fashion, and had spread with prayer rugs and silken
carpets and had placed on the divans a pair of mattresses, each
worth an hundred dinars.  On every mattress they had disposed a
rug of skin fit for a King and edged with a fringe of gold; and
a-middlemost the shop stood a third seat still richer, even as
the place required.  Then Taj al-Muluk sat down on one divan, and
Aziz on another, whilst the Wazir seated himself on that in the
centre, and the servants stood before them.  The city people soon
heard of them and crowded about them, so that they sold some of
their goods and not a few of their stuffs; for Taj al-Muluk's
beauty and loveliness had become the talk of the town.  Thus they
passed a trifle of time, and every day the people flocked to them
and pressed upon them more and more, till the Wazir, after
exhorting Taj al-Muluk to keep his secret, commended him to the
care of Aziz and went home, that he might commune with himself
alone and cast about for some contrivance which might profit
them.  Meanwhile, the two young men sat talking and Taj al-Muluk
said to Aziz, "Haply some one will come from the Lady Dunya." So
he ceased not expecting this chance days and nights, but his
heart was troubled and he knew neither sleep nor rest; for desire
had got the mastery of him, and love and longing were sore upon
him, so that he renounced the solace of sleep and abstained from
meat and drink; yet ceased he not to be like the moon on the
night of fullness.  Now one day as he sat in the shop, behold,
there came up an ancient woman.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Thirty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir
Dandan continued to Zau al-Makan: Now one day as Taj al-Muluk sat
in his shop, behold, there appeared an ancient woman, who came up
to him followed by two slave girls.  She ceased not advancing
till she stood before the shop of Taj al-Muluk and, observing his
symmetry and beauty and loveliness, marvelled at his charms and
sweated in her petticoat trousers, exclaiming, "Glory to Him who
created thee out of vile water, and made thee a temptation to all
beholders!" And she fixed her eyes on him and said, "This is not
a mortal, he is none other than an angel deserving the highest
respect." [FN#28] Then she drew near and saluted him, whereupon he
returned her salute and rose to his feet to receive her and
smiled in her face (all this by a hint from Aziz); after which he
made her sit down by his side and fanned her with a fan, till she
was rested and refreshed.  Then she turned to Taj al-Muluk and
said, "O my son!  O thou who art perfect in bodily gifts and
spiritual graces; say me, art thou of this country?" He replied,
in voice the sweetest and in tone the pleasantest, "By Allah, O
my mistress, I was never in this land during my life till this
time, nor do I abide here save by way of diversion." Rejoined
she, "May the Granter grant thee all honour and prosperity!  And
what stuffs hast thou brought with thee?  Show me something
passing fine; for the beauteous should bring nothing but what is
beautiful." When he heard her words, his heart fluttered and he
knew not their inner meaning; but Aziz made a sign to him and he
replied, "I have everything thou canst desire and especially I
have goods that besit none but Kings and King's daughters; so
tell me what stuff thou wantest and for whom, that I may show
thee what will be fitting for him." This he said, that he might
learn the meaning of her words; and she rejoined, "I want a stuff
fit for the Princess Dunya, daughter of King Shahriman." Now when
the Prince heard the name of his beloved, he joyed with great joy
and said to Aziz, "Give me such a parcel." So Aziz brought it and
opened it before Taj al-Muluk who said to the old woman, "Select
what will suit her; for these goods are to be found only with
me." She chose stuffs worth a thousand dinars and asked, "How
much is this?"; and she ceased not the while to talk with him and
rub what was inside her thighs with the palm of her hand. 
Answered Taj al-Muluk, "Shall I haggle with the like of thee
about this paltry price?  Praised be Allah who hath acquainted me
with thee!" The old woman rejoined, "Allah's name be upon thee! 
I commend thy beautiful face to the protection of the Lord of the
Daybreak. [FN#29] Beautiful face and eloquent speech!  Happy she
who lieth in thy bosom and claspeth thy waist in her arms and
enjoyeth thy youth, especially if she be beautiful and lovely
like thyself!" At this, Taj al-Muluk laughed till he fell on his
back and said to himself, "O Thou who fulfillest desires human by
means of pimping old women!  They are the true fulfillers of
desires!" Then she asked, "O my son, what is thy name?" and he
answered, "My name is Taj al-Muluk, the Crown of Kings." Quoth
she, "This is indeed a name of Kings and King's sons and thou art
clad in merchant's clothes." Quoth Aziz, "for the love his
parents and family bore him and for the value they set on him,
they named him thus." Replied the old woman, "Thou sayest sooth,
Allah guard you both from the evil eye and the envious, though
hearts be broken by your charms!" Then she took the stuffs and
went her way; but she was amazed at his beauty and stature and
symmetry, and she ceased not going till she found the Lady Dunya
and said to her, "O my mistress!  I have brought thee some
handsome stuffs." Quoth the Princess, "Show me that same"; and
the old woman, "O apple of my eye, here it is, turn it over and
examine it." Now when the Princess looked at it she was amazed
and said, "O my nurse, this is indeed handsome stuff: I have
never seen its like in our city." "O my lady," replied the old
nurse, "he who sold it me is handsomer still.  It would seem as
if Rizwan had left the gates of Paradise open in his
carelessness, and as if the youth who sold me this stuff had come
bodily out of Heaven.  I would he might sleep this night with
thee and might lie between thy breasts. [FN#30] He hath come to
thy city with these precious stuffs for amusement's sake, and he
is a temptation to all who set eyes on him." The Princess laughed
at her words and said, "Allah afflict thee, O pernicious old hag! 
Thou dotest and there is no sense left in thee." Presently, she
resumed, "Give me the stuff that I may look at it anew." So she
gave it her and she took it again and saw that its size was small
and its value great.  It pleased her, for she had never in her
life seen its like, and she exclaimed, "By Allah, this is a
handsome stuff!" Answered the old woman, "O my lady, by Allah! 
if thou sawest its owner thou wouldst know him for the handsomest
man on the face of the earth." Quoth the Lady Dunya, "Didst thou
ask him if he had any need, that he might tell us and we might
satisfy it?" But the nurse shook her head and said, "The Lord
keep thy sagacity!  By Allah, he hath a want, may thy skill not
fail thee.  What!  is any man free from wants?" Rejoined the
Princess, "Go back to him and salute him and say to him, 'Our
land and town are honoured by thy visit and, if thou have any
need, we will fulfil it to thee, on our head and eyes.' "  So the
old woman at once returned to Taj al-Muluk, and when he saw her
his heart jumped for joy and gladness and he rose to his feet
before her and, taking her hand, seated her by his side.  As soon
as she was rested, she told him what Princess Dunya had said; and
he on hearing it joyed with exceeding joy; his breast dilated to
the full; gladness entered his heart and he said to himself,
"Verily, I have my need." Then he asked the old woman, "Haply
thou wilt take her a message from me and bring me her answer?";
and she answered, "I hear and I obey." So he said to Aziz, "Bring
me ink-case and paper and a brazen pen." And when Aziz brought
him what he sought, he hent the pen in hand and wrote these lines
of poetry,

"I write to thee, O fondest hope!  a writ *
     Of grief that severance on my soul cloth lay:
Saith its first line, 'Within my heart is [owe!' *
     Its second, 'Love and Longing on me prey!'
Its third, 'My patience waste is, fades my life!' *
     Its fourth, 'Naught shall my pain and pine allay!'
Its fifth, 'When shall mine eyes enjoy thy sight?' *
     Its sixth, 'Say, when shall dawn our meeting-day?' "

And, lastly, by way of subscription he wrote these words. "This
letter is from the captive of captivation * prisoned in the hold
of longing expectation * wherefrom is no emancipation * but in
anticipation and intercourse and in unification * after absence
and separation. * For from the severance of friends he loveth so
fain * he suffereth love pangs and pining pain. *" Then his tears
rushed out, and he indited these two couplets,

"I write thee, love, the while my tears pour down; *
     Nor cease they ever pouring thick and fleet:
Yet I despair not of my God, whose grace *
     Haply some day will grant us twain to meet."

Then he folded the letter [FN#31] and sealed it with his signet
ring and gave it to the old woman, saying, "Carry it to the Lady
Dunya." Quoth she, "To hear is to obey;" whereupon he gave her a
thousand dinars and said to her, "O my mother!  accept this gift
from me as a token of my affection." She took both from him and
blessed him and went her way and never stinted walking till she
went in to the Lady Dunya.  Now when the Princess saw her she
said to her, "O my nurse, what is it he asketh of need that we
may fulfil his wish to him?" Replied the old woman, "O my lady,
he sendeth thee this letter by me, and I know not what is in it;"
and handed it to her.  Then the Princess took the letter and read
it; and when she understood it, she exclaimed, "Whence cometh and
whither goeth this merchant man that he durst address such a
letter to me?" And she slapt her face saying, "'Whence are we
that we should come to shopkeeping?  Awah!  Awah!  By the lord,
but that I fear Almighty Allah I had slain him;" and she added,
"Yea, I had crucified [FN#32] him over his shop door!" Asked the
old woman, "What is in this letter to vex thy heart and move thy
wrath on this wise?  Doth it contain a complaint of oppression or
demand for the price of the stuff?" Answered the Princess, "Woe
to thee!  There is none of this in it, naught but words of love
and endearment.  This is all through thee: otherwise whence
should this Satan [FN#33] know me?" Rejoined the old woman, "o my
lady, thou sittest in thy high palace and none may have access to
thee; no, not even the birds of the air.  Allah keep thee, and
keep thy youth from blame and reproach!  Thou needest not care
for the barking of dogs, for thou art a Princess, the daughter of
a King.  Be not wroth with me that I brought thee this letter,
knowing not what was in it; but I opine that thou send him an
answer and threaten him with death and forbid him this foolish
talk; surely he will abstain and not do the like again." Quoth
the Lady Dunya, "I fear that, if I write to him, he will desire
me the more." The old woman returned "When he heareth thy threats
and promise of punishment, he will desist from his persistence."
She cried, "Here with the ink case and paper and brazen pen;" and
when they brought them she wrote these couplets,

"O thou who for thy wakeful nights wouldst claim my love
     to boon, * For what of pining thou must feel and
     tribulation!
Dost thou, fond fool and proud of sprite, seek meeting with the
     Moon? * Say, did man ever win his wish to take in arms the
     Moon?
I counsel thee, from soul cast out the wish that dwells
     therein, * And cut that short which threatens thee with 
     sore risk oversoon:
An to such talk thou dare return, I bid thee to expect *
     Fro' me such awful penalty as suiteth froward loon:
I swear by Him who moulded man from gout of clotted 
     blood, [FN#34] * Who lit the Sun to shine by day and lit 
     for night the moon,
An thou return to mention that thou spakest in thy pride, *
     Upon a cross of tree for boon I'll have thee crucified!"

Then she folded the letter and handing it to the old woman said,
"Give him this and say him, 'Cease from this talk!' " "Hearkening
and obedience," replied she, and taking the letter with joy,
returned to her own house, where she passed the night; and when
morning dawned she betook herself to the shop of Taj al-Muluk
whom she found expecting her.  When he saw her, he was ready to
fly [FN#35] for delight, and when she came up to him, he stood to
her on his feet and seated her by his side.  Then she brought out
the letter and gave it to him, saying, "Read what is in this;"
adding "When Princess Dunya read thy letter she was angry; but I
coaxed her and jested with her till I made her laugh, and she had
pity on thee and she hath returned thee an answer." He thanked
her for her kindness and bade Aziz give her a thousand gold
pieces: then he perused the letter and understanding it fell to
weeping a weeping so sore that the old woman's heart was moved to
ruth for him, and his tears and complaints were grievous to her. 
Presently she asked him, "O my son, what is there in this letter
to make thee weep?" Answered he, "She hath threatened me with
death and crucifixion and she forbiddeth me to write to her, but
if I write not my death were better than my life.  So take thou
my answer to the letter and let her work her will." Rejoined the
old woman, "By the life of thy youth, needs must I risk my
existence for thee, that I may bring thee to thy desire and help
thee to win what thou hast at heart!" And Taj al-Muluk said,
"Whatever thou dost, I will requite thee for it and do thou weigh
it in the scales of thy judgement, for thou art experienced in
managing matters, and skilled in reading the chapters of the book
of intrigue: all hard matters to thee are easy doings; and Allah
can bring about everything." Then he took a sheet of paper and
wrote thereon these improvised couplets,

"Yestre'en my love with slaughter menaced me, *
     But sweet were slaughter and Death's foreordained:
Yes, Death is sweet for lover doomed to bear *
     Long life, rejected, injured and constrained:
By Allah!  deign to visit friendless friend!  *
     Thy thrall am I and like a thrall I'm chained:
Mercy, O lady mine, for loving thee!  *
     Who loveth noble soul should be assained."

 Then he sighed heavy sighs and wept till the old woman wept also
and presently taking the letter she said to him, "Be of good
cheer and cool eyes and clear; for needs must I bring thee to thy
wish."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Thirty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Taj
al-Muluk wept the old woman said to him, "Be of good cheer and
cool eyes and clear; for needs must I bring thee to thy wish."
Then she rose and left him on coals of fire; and returned to
Princess Dunya, whom she found still showing on her changed face
rage at Taj al-Muluk's letter.  So she gave her his second
letter, whereat her wrath redoubled and she said, "Did I not say
he would desire us the more?" Replied the old woman, "What thing
is this dog that he should aspire to thee?" Quoth the Princess,
"Go back to him and tell him that, if he write me after this, I
will cut off his head." Quoth the nurse, "Write these words in a
letter and I will take it to him that his fear may be the
greater." So she took a sheet of paper and wrote thereon these
couplets,

"Ho thou, who past and bygone risks regardest with uncare! *
     Thou who to win thy meeting prize dost overslowly fare!
In pride of spirit thinkest thou to win the star Soha [FN#36]? *
     Albe thou may not reach the Moon which shines through
     upper air?
How darest thou expect to win my favours, hope to clip *
     Upon a lover's burning breast my lance like shape and rare?
Leave this thy purpose lest my wrath come down on thee some
     day, * A day of wrath shall hoary turn the partings of
     thy hair!"

Then she folded the letter and gave it to the old woman, who took
it and repaired to Taj al-Muluk.  And when he saw her, he rose to
his feet and exclaimed, "May Allah never bereave me of the
blessing of thy coming!" Quoth she, "Take the answer to thy
letter." He took it and reading it, wept with sore weeping and
said, "I long for some one to slay me at this moment and send me
to my rest, for indeed death were easier to me than this my
state!" Then he took ink case and pen and paper and wrote a
letter containing these two couplets,

"O hope of me!  pursue me not with rigour and disdain: *
     Deign thou to visit lover wight in love of thee is drowned;
Deem not a life so deeply wronged I longer will endure; * My soul
     for severance from my friend divorced this frame unsound."

Lastly he folded the letter and handed it to the old woman,
saying, "Be not angry with me, though I have wearied thee to no
purpose." And he bade Aziz give her other thousand ducats,
saying, "O my mother, needs must this letter result in perfect
union or utter severance." Replied she, "O my son, by Allah, I
desire nought but thy weal; and it is my object that she be
thine, for indeed thou art the shining moon, and she the rising
sun. [FN#37] If I do not bring you together, there is no profit in
my existence; and I have lived my life till I have reached the
age of ninety years in the practice of wile and intrigue; so how
should I fail to unite two lovers, though in defiance of right
and law?" Then she took leave of him having comforted his heart,
and ceased not walking till she went in to the Lady Dunya.  Now
she had hidden the letter in her hair: so when she sat down by
the Princess she rubbed her head and said, "O my lady, maybe thou
wilt untwist my hair knot, for it is a time since I went to the
Hammam." The King's daughter bared her arms to the elbows and,
letting down the old woman's locks, began to loose the knot of
back hair; when out dropped the letter and the Lady Dunya seeing
it, asked, "What is this paper?" Quoth the nurse, "As I sat in
the merchant's shop, this paper must have stuck to me: give it to
me that I may return it to him; possibly it containeth some
account whereof he hath need." But the Princess opened it and
read it and, when she understood it, she cried out, "This is one
of thy manifold tricks, and hadst thou not reared me, I would lay
violent hands on thee this moment!  Verily Allah hath afflicted
me with this merchant: but all that hath befallen me with him is
on thy head.  I know not from what country this one can have
come: no man but he would venture to affront me thus, and I fear
lest this my case get abroad, more by token as it concerneth one
who is neither of my kin nor of my peers." Rejoined the old woman
"None would dare speak of this for fear of thy wrath and for awe
of thy sire; so there can be no harm in sending him an answer."
Quoth the Princess, "O my nurse, verily this one is a perfect
Satan!  How durst he use such language to me and not dread the
Sultan's rage.  Indeed, I am perplexed about his case: if I order
him to be put to death, it were unjust; and if I leave him alive
his boldness will increase." Quoth the old woman, "Come, write
him a letter; it may be he will desist in dread." So she called
for paper and ink case and pen and wrote these couplets,

"Thy folly drives thee on though long I chid, *
     Writing in verse: how long shall I forbid?
For all forbiddal thou persistest more, *
     And my sole grace it is to keep it hid;
Then hide thy love nor ever dare reveal, *
     For an thou speak, of thee I'll soon be rid
If to thy silly speech thou turn anew, *
     Ravens shall croak for thee the wold amid:
And Death shall come and beat thee down ere long, *
     Put out of sight and bury 'neath an earthen lid:
Thy folk, fond fool!  thou'lt leave for thee to mourn, *
     And through their lives to sorrow all forlorn."

Then she folded the letter and committed it to the old woman, who
took it and returning to Taj al-Muluk, gave it to him.  When he
read it, he knew that the Princess was hard hearted and that he
should not win access to her; so he complained of his case to the
Wazir and besought his counsel.  Quoth the Minister, "Know thou
that naught will profit thee save that thou write to her and
invoke the retribution of Heaven upon her." And quoth the Prince,
"O my brother, O Aziz, do thou write to her as if my tongue
spake, according to thy knowledge." So Aziz took a paper and
wrote these couplets,

"By the Five Shaykhs, [FN#38] O Lord, I pray deliver me; *
     Let her for whom I suffer bear like misery:
Thou knowest how I fry in flaming lowe of love, *
     While she I love hath naught of ruth or clemency:
How long shall I, despite my pain, her feelings spare? *
     How long shall she wreak tyranny o'er weakling me?
In pains of never ceasing death I ever grieve: *
     O Lord, deign aid; none other helping hand I see.
How fain would I forget her and forget her love! *
     But how forget when Love garred Patience death to dree?
O thou who hinderest Love to 'joy fair meeting tide *
     Say!  art thou safe from Time and Fortune's jealousy?
Art thou not glad and blest with happy life, while I *
     From folk and country for thy love am doomed flee?"

Then Aziz folded the letter and gave it to Taj al-Muluk, who read
it and was pleased with it.  So he handed it to the old woman,
who took it and went in with it to Princess Dunya.  But when she
read it and mastered the meaning thereof, she was enraged with
great rage and said, "All that hath befallen me cometh by means
of this ill omened old woman!" Then she cried out to the damsels
and eunuchs, saying, "Seize this old hag, this accursed
trickstress and beat her with your slippers!" So they came down
upon her till she swooned away; and, when she came to herself,
the Princess said to her, "By the Lord!  O wicked old woman, did
I not fear Almighty Allah, I would slay thee." Then quoth she to
them, "Beat her again" and they did so till she fainted a second
time, whereupon she bade them drag her forth and throw her
outside the palace door.  So they dragged her along on her face
and threw her down before the gate; but as soon as she revived
she got up from the ground and, walking and sitting by turns,
made her way home.  There she passed the night till morning, when
she arose and went to Taj al-Muluk and told them all that had
occurred.  He was distressed at this grievous news and said, "O
my mother, hard indeed to us is that which hath befallen thee,
but all things are according to fate and man's lot." Replied she,
"Be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and clear, for I will
not give over striving till I have brought thee and her together,
and made thee enjoy this wanton who hath burnt my skin with
beating." Asked the Prince "Tell me what caused her to hate men;"
and the old woman answered, "It arose from what she saw in a
dream." "And what was this dream?" "'Twas this: one night, as she
lay asleep, she saw a fowler spread his net upon the ground and
scatter wheat grain round it.  Then he sat down hard by, and not
a bird in the neighbourhood but flocked to his toils.  Amongst
the rest she beheld a pair of pigeons, male and female; and,
whilst she was watching the net, behold, the male bird's foot
caught in the meshes and he began to struggle; whereupon all the
other birds took fright and flew away.  But presently his mate
came back and hovered over him, then alighted on the toils
unobserved by the fowler, and fell to pecking with her beak and
pulling at the mesh in which the male bird's foot was tangled,
till she released the toes and they flew away together.  Then the
fowler came up, mended his net and seated himself afar off. 
After an hour or so the birds flew back and the female pigeon was
caught in the net; whereupon all the other birds took fright and
scurried away; and the male pigeon fled with the rest and did not
return to his mate, but the fowler came up and took the female
pigeon and cut her throat.  The Princess awoke, troubled by her
dream, and said, 'All males are like this pigeon, worthless
creatures: and men in general lack grace and goodness to women.'"
When the old woman had ended her story, the Prince said to her,
"O my mother, I desire to have one look at her, though it be my
death; so do thou contrive me some contrivance for seeing her."
She replied, "Know then that she hath under her palace windows a
garden wherein she taketh her pleasure; and thither she resorteth
once in every month by the private door.  After ten days, the
time of her thus going forth to divert herself will arrive; so
when she is about to visit the garden, I will come and tell thee,
that thou mayst go thither and meet her.  And look thou leave not
the garden, for haply, an she see thy beauty and Loveliness, her
heart will be taken with love of thee, and love is the most
potent means of union." He said, "I hear and obey;" whereupon he
and Aziz arose and left the shop and, taking the old woman with
them, showed her the place where they lodged.  Then said Taj al-
Muluk to Aziz, "O my brother, I have no need of the shop now,
having fulfilled my purpose of it; so I give it to thee with all
that is in it; for that thou hast come abroad with me and hast
left thy native land for my sake." Aziz accepted his gift and
then they sat conversing, while the Prince questioned him of the
strange adventures which had befallen him, and his companion
acquainted him with the particulars thereof.  Presently, they
went to the Wazir and, reporting to him Taj al-Muluk's purpose,
asked him, "What is to be done?" "Let us go to the garden,"
answered he.  So each and every donned richest clothes and went
forth, followed by three white slaves to the garden, which they
found thick with thickets and railing its rills.  When they saw
the keeper sitting at the gate, they saluted him with the Salam
and he returned their salute.  Then the Wazir gave him an hundred
gold pieces, saying, "Prithee, take this small sum and fetch us
somewhat to eat; for we are strangers and I have with me these
two lads whom I wish to divert." [FN#39] The Gardener took the
sequins and said to them, "Enter and amuse yourselves in the
garden, for it is all yours; and sit down till I bring you what
food you require." So he went to the market while the Wazir and
Taj al-Muluk and Aziz entered the garden.  And shortly after
leaving for the bazar the Gardener returned with a roasted lamb
and cotton white bread, which he placed before them, and they ate
and drank; thereupon he served up sweetmeats, and they ate of
them, and washed their hands and sat talking.  Presently the
Wazir said to the garth keeper, "Tell me about this garden: is it
thine or dost thou rent it?" The Shaykh replied, "It doth not
belong to me, but to our King's daughter, the Princess Dunya."
"What be thy monthly wages?" asked the Wazir and he answered,
"One diner and no more." Then the Minister looked round about the
garden and, seeing in its midst a pavilion tall and grand but old
and disused, said to the keeper, "O elder, I am minded to do here
a good work, by which thou shalt remember me.  Replied the other,
"O my lord, what is the good work thou wouldest do?" "Take these
three hundred diners," rejoined the Wazir When the Keeper heard
speak of the gold, he said, "O my lord, whatso thou wilt, do!" So
the Wazir gave him the monies, saying, "Inshallah, we will make a
good work in this place!" Then they left him and returned to
their lodging, where they passed the night; and when it was the
next day, the Minister sent for a plasterer and a painter and a
skilful goldsmith and, furnishing them with all the tools they
wanted, carried them to the garden, where he bade them whitewash
the walls of the pavilion and decorate it with various kinds of
paintings.  Moreover he sent for gold and lapis lazuli [FN#40] and
said to the painter, "Figure me on the wall, at the upper end of
this hall, a man fowler with his nets spread and birds falling
into them and a female pigeon entangled in the meshes by her
bill." And when the painter had finished his picture on one side,
the Wazir said, "Figure me on the other side a similar figure and
represent the she pigeon alone in the snare and the fowler
seizing her and setting the knife to her neck; and draw on the
third side wall, a great raptor clutching the male pigeon, her
mate, and digging talons into him." The artist did his bidding,
and when he and the others had finished the designs, they
received their hire and went away.  Then the Wazir and his
companions took leave of the Gardener and returned to their
place, where they sat down to converse.  And Taj al-Muluk said to
Aziz, "O my brother, recite me some verses: perchance it may
broaden my breast and dispel my dolours and quench the fire
flaming in my heart." So Aziz chanted with sweet modulation these
couplets,

"Whate'er they say of grief to lovers came, *
     I, weakling I, can single handed claim:
An seek thou watering spot, [FN#41] my streaming eyes *
     Pour floods that thirst would quench howe'er it flame
Or wouldest view what ruin Love has wrought *
     With ruthless hands, then see this wasted frame."

And his eyes ran over with tears and he repeated these couplets
also,

"Who loves not swan-neck and gazelle-like eyes, *
     Yet claims to know Life's joys, I say he lies:
In Love is mystery, none avail to learn *
     Save he who loveth in pure loving wise.
Allah my heart ne'er lighten of this love, *
     Nor rob the wakefulness these eyelids prize."

Then he changed the mode of song and sang these couplets:

"Ibn Sina [FN#42] in his Canon cloth opine *
     Lovers' best cure is found in merry song:
In meeting lover of a like degree, *
     Dessert in garden, wine draughts long and strong:
I chose another who of thee might cure *
     While Force and Fortune aided well and long
But ah! I learnt Love's mortal ill, wherein *
     Ibn Sina's recipe is fond and wrong."

After hearing them to the end, Taj al-Muluk was pleased with his
verses and wondered at his eloquence and the excellence of his
recitation, saying, "Indeed, thou hast done away with somewhat of
my sorrow." Then quoth the Wazir "Of a truth, there occurred to
those of old what astoundeth those who hear it told." Quoth the
Prince, "If thou canst recall aught of this kind, prithee let us
hear thy subtle lines and keep up the talk." So the Minister
chanted in modulated song these couplets,

"Indeed I deemed thy favours might be bought *
     By gifts of gold and things that joy the sprite
And ignorantly thought thee light-o'-love, *
     When can thy love lay low the highmost might;
Until I saw thee choosing one, that one *
     Loved with all favour, crowned with all delight:
Then wot I thou by sleight canst ne'er be won *
     And under wing my head I hid from sight
And in this nest of passion made my wone, *
     Wherein I nestle morning, noon and night."

So far concerning them; but as regards the old woman she remained
shut up from the world in her house, till it befel that the
King's daughter was taken with a desire to divert herself in the
garden.  Now she had never been wont so to do save in company
with her nurse; accordingly she sent for her and made friends
with her and soothed her sorrow, saying, "I wish to go forth to
the garden, that I may divert myself with the sight of its trees
and Fruits, and broaden my breast with the scent of its flowers."
Replied the old woman, "I hear and obey; but first I would go to
my house, and soon I will be with thee." The Princess rejoined,
"Go home, but be not long absent from me." So the old woman left
her and, repairing to Taj al-Muluk, said to him, "Get thee ready
and don thy richest dress and go to the garden and find out the
Gardener and salute him and then hide thyself therein." "To hear
is to obey" answered he; and she agreed with him upon a signal,
after which she returned to the Lady Dunya.  As soon as she was
gone, the Wazir and Aziz rose and robed Taj al-Muluk in a
splendid suit of royal raiment worth five thousand diners, and
girt his middle with a girdle of gold set with gems and precious
metals.  Then they repaired to the garden and found seated at the
gate the Keeper who, as soon as he saw the Prince, sprang to his
feet and received him with all respect and reverence, and opening
the gate, said, "Enter and take thy pleasure in looking at the
garden." Now the Gardener knew not that the King's daughter was
to visit the place that day; but when Taj al-Muluk had been a
little while there, he heard a hubbub and ere he could think, out
issued the eunuchs and damsels by the private wicket.  The
Gardener seeing this came up to the Prince, informed him of her
approach and said to him, "O my lord, what is to be done?  The
Princess Dunya, the King's daughter, is here." Replied the
Prince, "Fear not, no harm shall befal thee; for I will hide me
somewhere about the garden." So the Keeper exhorted him to the
utmost prudence and went away.  Presently the Princess entered
the garden with her damsels and with the old woman, who said to
herself, "If these eunuchs stay with us, we shall not attain our
end." So quoth she to the King's daughter, "O my lady, I have
somewhat to tell thee which shall ease thy heart." Quoth the
Princess, "Say what thou hast to say." "O my lady, rejoined the
old woman, "thou hast no need of these eunuchs at a time like the
present; nor wilt thou be able to divert thyself at thine ease,
whilst they are with us; so send them away;" and the Lady Dunya
replied, "Thou speakest sooth" Accordingly she dismissed them and
presently began to walk about, whilst Taj al-Muluk looked upon
her and fed his eyes on her beauty and loveliness (but she knew
it not); and every time he gazed at her he fainted by reason of
her passing charms. [FN#43] The old woman drew her on by converse
till they reached the pavilion which the Wazir had bidden be
decorated, when the Princess entered and cast a glance round and
perceived the picture of the birds the fowler and the pigeon;
whereupon she cried, "Exalted be Allah!  This is the very
counterfeit presentment of what I saw in my dream." She continued
to gaze at the figures of the birds and the fowler with his net,
admiring the work, and presently she said, "O my nurse, I have
been wont to blame and hate men, but look now at the fowler how
he hath slaughtered the she bird who set free her mate; who was
minded to return to her and aid her to escape when the bird of
prey met him and tore him to pieces." Now the old woman feigned
ignorance to her and ceased not to occupy her in converse, till
they drew near the place where Taj al-Muluk lay hidden. 
Thereupon she signed to him to come out and walk under the
windows of the pavilion, and, as the Lady Dunya stood looking
from the casement, behold, her glance fell that way and she saw
him and noting his beauty of face and form, said to the old
woman, "O my nurse, whence cometh yonder handsome youth?" Replied
the old woman, "I know nothing of him save that I think he must
be some great King's son, for he attaineth comeliness in excess
and extreme loveliness." And the Lady Dunya fell in love with him
to distraction; the spells which bound her were loosed and her
reason was overcome by his beauty and grace; and his fine stature
and proportions strongly excited her desires sexual.  So she
said, "O my nurse!  this is indeed a handsome youth;" and the old
woman replied, "Thou sayest sooth, O my lady," and signed to Taj
al-Muluk to go home.  And though desire and longing flamed in him
and he was distraught for love, yet he went away and took leave
of the Gardener and returned to his place, obeying the old woman
and not daring to cross her.  When he told the Wazir and Aziz
that she had signed him to depart, they exhorted him to patience,
saying, "Did not the ancient dame know that there was an object
to be gained by thy departure, she had not signalled thee to
return home." Such was the case with Taj al-Muluk, the Wazir and
Aziz but as regards the King's daughter, the Lady Dunya, desire
and passion redoubled upon her; she was overcome with love and
longing and she said to her nurse, "I know not how I shall manage
a meeting with this youth, but through thee." Exclaimed the old
woman, "I take refuge with Allah from Satan the stoned!  Thou who
art averse from men!  How cometh it then that thou art thus
afflicted with hope and fear of this young man?  Yet, by Allah,
none is worthy of thy youth but he." Quoth the Lady Dunya, "O my
nurse, further my cause and help me to foregather with him, and
thou shalt have of me a thousand diners and a dress of honour
worth as much more: but if thou aid me not to come at him, I am a
dead woman in very sooth." Replied the ancient dame, "Go to thy
palace and leave me to devise means for bringing you twain
together.  I will throw away my life to content you both!" So the
Lady Dunya returned to her palace, and the old woman betook
herself to Taj al-Muluk who, when he saw her, rose to receive her
and entreated her with respect and reverence making her sit by
his side.  Then she said, "The trick hath succeeded," and told
him all that had passed between herself and the Princess.  He
asked her, "When is our meeting to be?"; and she answered,
"Tomorrow." So he gave her a thousand diners and a dress of like
value, and she took them and stinted not walking till she
returned to her mistress, who said to her, "O my nurse!  what
news of the be loved?" Replied she, "I have learnt where he
liveth and will bring him to thee tomorrow." At this the Princess
was glad and gave her a thousand diners and a dress worth as much
more, and she took them and returned to her own place, where she
passed the night till morning.  Then she went to Taj al-Muluk and
dressing him in woman's clothes, said to him, "Follow me and sway
from side to side [FN#44] as thou steppest, and hasten not thy
pace nor take heed of any who speaketh to thee." And after thus
charging him she went out, and the Prince followed her in woman's
attire and she continued to charge and encourage him by the way,
that he might not be afraid; nor ceased they walking till they
came to the Palace-gate.  She entered and the Prince after her,
and she led him on, passing through doors and vestibules, till
they had passed seven doors. [FN#45] As they approached the
seventh, she said to him, "Hearten thy heart and when I call out
to thee and say, 'O damsel pass on!' do not slacken thy pace, but
advance as if about to run.  When thou art in the vestibule, look
to thy left and thou wilt see a saloon with doors: count five
doors and enter the sixth, for therein is thy desire." Asked Taj
al-Muluk, "And whither wilt thou go?"; and she answered, "Nowhere
shall I go except that perhaps I may drop behind thee, and the
Chief Eunuch may detain me to chat with him." She walked on (and
he behind her) till she reached the door where the Chief Eunuch
was stationed and he, seeing Taj al-Muluk with her dressed as a
slave girl, said to the old woman, "What business hath this girl
with thee?" Replied she, "This is a slave girl of whom the Lady
Dunya hath heard that she is skilled in different kinds of work
and she hath a mind to buy her." Rejoined the Eunuch, "I know
neither slave girls nor anyone else; and none shall enter here
without my searching according to the King's commands."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Thirty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
Chamberlain Eunuch cried to the old woman, "I know neither slave
girl nor anyone else; and none shall enter here without my
searching him according to the King's commands." Then quoth she,
feigning to be angry, "I thought thee a man of sense and good
breeding; but, if thou be changed, I will let the Princess know
of it and tell her how thou hinderest her slave girl;" and she
cried out to Taj al-Muluk, saying, "Pass on, O damsel!" So he
passed on into the vestibule as she bade him, whilst the Eunuch
was silent and said no more.  The Prince counted five doors and
entered the sixth where he found the Princess Dunya standing and
awaiting him.  As soon as she saw him, she knew him and clasped
him to her breast, and he clasped her to his bosom.  Presently
the old woman came in to them, having made a pretext to dismiss
the Princess's slave girls for fear of disgrace; and the Lady
Dunya said to her, "Be thou our door keeper!" So she and Taj al-
Muluk abode alone together and ceased not kissing and embracing
and twining leg with leg till dawn. [FN#46] When day drew near,
she left him and, shutting the door upon him, passed into another
chamber, where she sat down as was her wont, whilst her slave
women came in to her, and she attended to their affairs and
conversed with them.  Then she said to them, "Go forth from me
now, for I wish to amuse myself in privacy." So they withdrew and
she betook herself to Taj al-Muluk, and the old woman brought
them food, of which they ate and returned to amorous dalliance
till dawn.  Then the door was locked upon him as on the day
before; and they ceased not to do thus for a whole month.  This
is how it fared with Taj al-Muluk and the Lady Dunya; but as
regards the Wazir and Aziz when they found that the Prince had
gone to the Palace of the King's daughter and there delayed all
the while, they concluded that he would never return from it and
that he was lost for ever; and Aziz said to the Wazir, "O my
father, what shall we do?" He replied, "O my son, this is a
difficult matter, and except we return to his sire and tell him,
he will blame us therefor." So they made ready at once and
forthright set out for the Green Land and the Country of the Two
Columns, and sought Sulayman Shah's capital.  And they traversed
the valleys night and day till they went in to the King, and
acquainted him with what had befallen his son and how from the
time he entered the Princess's Palace they had heard no news of
him.  At this the King was as though the Day of Doom had dawned
for him and regret was sore upon him, and he proclaimed a Holy
War [FN#47] throughout his realm.  After which he sent forth his
host without the town and pitched tents for them and took up his
abode in his pavilion, whilst the levies came from all parts of
the kingdom; for his subjects loved him by reason of his great
justice and beneficence.  Then he marched with an army walling
the horizon, and departed in quest of his son.  Thus far
concerning them; but as regards Taj al-Muluk and the Lady Dunya
the two remained as they were half a year's time, whilst every
day they redoubled in mutual affection; and love and longing and
passion and desire so pressed upon Taj al Muluk, that at last he
opened his mind and said to her, "Know, O beloved of my heart and
vitals, that the longer I abide with thee, the more love and
longing and passion and desire increase on me, for that I have
not yet fulfilled the whole of my wish." Asked she, "What then
wouldst thou have, O light of my eyes and fruit of my vitals?  If
thou desire aught beside kissing and embracing and entwining of
legs with legs, do what pleaseth thee; for, by Allah, no partner
hath any part in us." [FN#48] But he answered "It is not that I
wish: I would fain acquaint thee with my true story.  Know, then,
that I am no merchant, nay, I am a King the son of a King, and my
father's name is the supreme King Sulayman Shah, who sent his
Wazir ambassador to thy father, to demand thee in marriage for
me, but when the news came to thee thou wouldst not consent."
Then he told her his past from first to last, nor is there any
avail in a twice told tale, and he added, "And now I wish to
return to my father, that he may send an ambassador to thy sire,
to demand thee in wedlock for me, so we may be at ease." When she
heard these words, she joyed with great joy because it suited
with her own wishes, and they passed the night on this
understanding.  But it so befel by the decree of Destiny that
sleep overcame them that night above all nights and they remained
till the sun had risen.  Now at this hour, King Shahriman was
sitting on his cushion of estate, with his Emirs and Grandees
before him, when the Syndic of the goldsmiths presented himself
between his hands, carrying a large box.  And he advanced and
opening it in presence of the King, brought out therefrom a
casket of fine work worth an hundred thousand diners, for that
which was therein of precious stones, rubies and emeralds beyond
the competence of any sovereign on earth to procure.  When the
King saw this, he marvelled at its beauty; and, turning to the
Chief Eunuch (him with whom the old woman had had to do), said to
him, "O Kafur, [FN#49] take this casket and wend with it to the
Princess Dunya." The Castrato took the casket and repairing to
the apartment of the King's daughter found the door shut and the
old woman lying asleep on the threshold; whereupon said he,
"What!  sleeping at this hour?" When the old woman heard the
Eunuch's voice she started from sleep and was terrified and said
to him, "Wait till I fetch the key." Then she went forth and fled
for her life.  Such was her case; but as regards the Epicene he,
seeing her alarm, lifted the door off its hinge pins, [FN#50] and
entering found the Lady Dunya with her arms round the neck of Taj
al-Muluk and both fast asleep.  At this sight he was confounded
and was preparing to return to the King, when the Princess awoke,
and seeing him, was terrified and changed colour and waxed pale,
and said to him, "O Kafur, veil thou what Allah hath
veiled!" [FN#51] But he replied, "I cannot conceal aught from the
King"; and, locking the door on them, returned to Shahriman, who
asked him, "Hast thou given the casket to the Princess?" Answered
the Eunuch, "Take the casket, here it is for I cannot conceal
aught from thee.  Know that I found a handsome young man by the
side of the Princess and they two asleep in one bed and in mutual
embrace." The King commanded them to be brought into the presence
and said to them, "What manner of thing is this?" and, being
violently enraged, seized a dagger and was about to strike Taj
al-Muluk with it, when the Lady Dunya threw herself upon him and
said to her father, "Slay me before thou slayest him." The King
reviled her and commended her to be taken back to her chamber:
then he turned to Taj al-Muluk and said to him, "Woe to thee! 
whence art thou?  Who is thy father and what hath emboldened thee
to debauch my daughter?" Replied the Prince, "Know, O King, that
if thou put me to death, thou art a lost man, and thou and all in
thy dominions will repent the deed." Quoth the King, "How so?";
and quoth Taj al-Muluk "Know that I am the son of King Sulayman
Shah, and ere thou knowest it, he will be upon thee with his
horse and foot." When King Shahriman heard these words he would
have deferred killing Taj al-Muluk and would rather have put him
in prison, till he should look into the truth of his words; but
his Wazir said to him, "O King of the Age, it is my opinion that
thou make haste to slay this gallows bird who dares debauch the
daughters of Kings." So the King cried to the headsman, "Strike
off his head; for he is a traitor." Accordingly, the herdsman
took him and bound him fast and raised his hand to the Emirs,
signing to consult them, a first and a second signal, thinking
thereby to gain time in this matter; [FN#52] but the King cried in
anger to him, "How long wilt thou consult others?  If thou
consult them again I will strike off thine own head.;' So the
headsman raised his hand till the hair of his armpit showed' and
was about to smite his neck,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Thirty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
headsman raised his hand to smite off his head when behold, loud
cries arose and the folk closed their shops; whereupon the King
said to the headsman, "Wait awhile," and despatched one to learn
the news.  The messenger fared forth and presently returned and
reported, "I saw an army like the dashing sea with its clashing
surge: and their horses curvetting till earth trembleth with the
tramp; and I know no more of them." When the King heard this, he
was confounded and feared for his realm lest it should be torn
from him; so he turned to his Minister and said, "Have not any of
our army gone forth to meet this army?" But ere he had done
speaking, his Chamberlains entered with messengers from the King
who was approaching, and amongst them the Wazir who had
accompanied Taj al-Muluk.  They began by saluting the King, who
rose to receive them and bade them draw near, and asked the cause
of their coming; whereupon the Minister came forward from amongst
them and stood before him and said "Know that he who hath come
down upon thy realm is no King like unto the Kings of yore and
the Sultans that went before." "And who is he?" asked Shahriman,
and the Wazir answered, "He is the Lord of justice and loyalty,
the bruit of whose magnanimity the caravans have blazed abroad,
the Sultan Sulayman Shah, Lord of the Green Land and the Two
Columns and the Mountains of Ispahan; he who loveth justice and
equity, and hateth oppression and iniquity.  And he saith to thee
that his son is with thee and in thy city; his son, his heart's
very core and the fruit of his loins, and if he find him in
safety, his aim is won and thou shalt have thanks and praise; but
if he have been lost from thy realm or if aught of evil have
befallen him, look thou for ruin and the wasting of thy reign! 
for this thy city shall become a wold wherein the raven shall
croak.  Thus have I done my errand to thee and peace be with
thee!" Now when King Shahriman heard from the messenger these
words, his heart was troubled and he feared for his kingdom: so
he cried out for his Grandees and Ministers, Chamberlains and
Lieutenants; and, when they appeared, he said to them, "Woe to
you!  Go down and search for the youth." Now the Prince was still
under the headsman's hands, but he was changed by the fright he
had undergone.  Presently, the Wazir, chancing to glance around,
saw the Prince on the rug of blood and recognised him; so he
arose and threw himself upon him, and so did the other envoys. 
Then they proceeded to loose his bonds and they kissed his hands
and feet, whereupon Taj al-Muluk opened his eyes and, recognising
his father's Wazir and his friend Aziz, fell down a fainting for
excess of delight in them.  When King Shahriman made sure that
the coming of this army was indeed because of this youth, he was
confounded and feared with great fear; so he went up to Taj al-
Muluk and, kissing his head, said to him, "O my son, be not wroth
with me, neither blame the sinner for his sin; but have
compassion on my grey hairs, and waste not my realm." Whereupon
Taj al-Muluk drew near unto him and kissing his hand, replied,
"No harm shall come to thee, for indeed thou art to me as my
father; but look that nought befal my beloved, the Lady Dunya!"
Rejoined the King, "O my lord!  fear not for her; naught but joy
shall betide her;" and he went on to excuse himself and made his
peace with Sulayman Shah's Wazir to whom he promised much money,
if he would conceal from the King what he had seen.  Then he bade
his Chief Officers take the Prince with them and repair to the
Hammam and clothe him in one of the best of his own suits and
bring him back speedily.  So they obeyed his bidding and bore him
to the bath and clad him in the clothes which King Shahriman had
set apart for him; and brought him back to the presence chamber. 
When he entered the King rose to receive him and made all his
Grandees stand in attendance on him.  Then Taj al-Muluk sat down
to converse with his father's Wazir and with Aziz, and he
acquainted them with what had befallen him; after which they said
to him, "During that delay we returned to thy father and gave him
to know that thou didst enter the palace of the Princess and
didst not return therefrom, and thy case seemed doubtful to us. 
But when thy sire heard of this he mustered his forces; then we
came to this land and indeed our coming hath brought to thee
relief in extreme case and to us great joy." Quoth he, "Good
fortune hath attended your every action, first and last." While
this was doing King Shahriman went in to his daughter Princess
Dunya, and found her wailing and weeping for Taj al-Muluk. 
Moreover, she had taken a sword and fixed the hilt in the ground
and had set the point to the middle of her heart between her
breasts; and she bent over the blade saying, "Needs must I slay
myself and not survive my beloved." When her father entered and
saw her in this case, he cried out to her, saying, "O Princess of
kings' daughters, hold thy hand and have ruth on thy sire and the
folk of thy realm!" Then he came up to her and continued, "Let it
not be that an ill thing befal thy father for thy sake!" And he
told her the whole tale that her lover was the son of King
Sulayman Shah and sought her to wife and he added, "The marriage
waiteth only for thy consent." Thereat she smiled and said, "Did
I not tell thee that he was the son of a Sultan?  By Allah, there
is no help for it but that I let him crucify thee on a bit of
wood worth two pieces of silver!" Replied the King, "O my
daughter, have mercy on me, so Allah have mercy on thee!"
Rejoined she, "Up with you and make haste and go bring him to me
without delay." Quoth the King, "On my head and eyes be it!"; and
he left her and, going in hastily to Taj al-Muluk, repeated her
words in his ear. [FN#53] So he arose and accompanied the King to
the Princess, and when she caught sight of her lover, she took
hold of him and embraced him in her father's presence and hung
upon him and kissed him, saying, "Thou hast desolated me by thine
absence!" Then she turned to her father and said, "Sawest thou
ever any that could do hurt to the like of this beautiful being,
who is moreover a King, the son of a King and of the free
born, [FN#54] guarded against ignoble deeds?" There upon King
Shahriman went out shutting the door on them with his own hand;
and he returned to the Wazir and to the other envoys of Sulayman
Shah and bade them inform their King that his son was in health
and gladness and enjoying all delight of life with his beloved. 
So they returned to King Sulayman and acquainted him with this;
whereupon King Shahriman ordered largesse of money and vivers to
the troops of King Sulayman Shah; and, when they had conveyed all
he had commanded, he bade be brought out an hundred coursers and
an hundred dromedaries and an hundred white slaves and an hundred
concubines and an hundred black slaves and an hundred female
slaves; all of which he forwarded to the King as a present.  Then
he took horse, with his Grandees and Chief Officers, and rode out
of the city in the direction of the King's camp.  As soon as
Sultan Sulayman Shah knew of his approach, he rose and advanced
many paces to meet him.  Now the Wazir and Aziz had told him all
the tidings, whereat he rejoiced and cried, "Praise be to Allah
who hath granted the dearest wish of my son!" Then King Sulayman
took King Shahriman in his arms and seated him beside himself on
the royal couch, where they conversed awhile and had pleasure in
each other's conversation.  Presently food was set before them,
and they ate till they were satisfied; and sweetmeats and dried
fruits were brought, and they enjoyed their dessert.  And after a
while came to them Taj al-Muluk, richly dressed and adorned, and
when his father saw him, he stood up and embraced him and kissed
him.  Then all who were sitting rose to do him honour; and the
two Kings seated him between them and they sat conversing a
while, after which quoth King Sulayman Shah to King Shahriman, "I
desire to have the marriage contract between my son and thy
daughter drawn up in the presence of witnesses, that the wedding
may be made public, even as is the custom of Kings." "I hear and
I obey," quoth King Shahriman and thereon summoned the Kazi and
the witnesses, who came and wrote out the marriage contract
between Taj al-Muluk and the Lady Dunya.  Then they gave
bakhshish [FN#55] of money and sweetmeats; and lavished incense
and essences; and indeed it was a day of joy and gladness and all
the grandees and soldiers rejoiced therein.  Then King Shahriman
proceeded to dower and equip his daughter; and Taj al-Muluk said
to his sire, "Of a truth, this young man Aziz is of the generous
and hath done me a notable service, having borne weariness with
me; and he hath travelled with me and hath brought me to my
desire.  He ceased never to show sufferance with me and exhort me
to patience till I accomplished my intent; and now he hath abided
with us two whole years, and he cut off from his native land.  So
now I purpose to equip him with merchandise, that he may depart
hence with a light heart; for his country is nearhand." Replied
his father, "Right is thy rede;" so they made ready an hundred
loads of the richest stuffs and the most costly, and Taj al-Muluk
presented them with great store of money to Aziz, and farewelled
him, saying, "O my brother and my true friend!  take these loads
and accept them from me by way of gift and token of affection,
and go in peace to thine own country." Aziz accepted the presents
and kissing the ground between the hands of the Prince and his
father bade them adieu.  Moreover, Taj al-Muluk mounted and
accompanied him three miles on his homeward way as a proof of
amity, after which Aziz conjured him to turn back, saying, "By
Allah, O my master, were it not for my mother, I never would part
from thee!  But, good my lord!  leave me not without news of
thee." Replied Taj al-Muluk, "So be it!" Then the Prince returned
to the city and Aziz journeyed on till he came to his native
town; and he entered it and ceased not faring till he went in to
his mother and found that she had built him a monument in the
midst of the house and used to visit it continually.  When he
entered, he saw her with hair dishevelled and dispread over the
tomb, weeping and repeating these lines,

"Indeed I'm strong to bear whate'er befal; *
     But weak to bear such parting's dire mischance:
What heart estrangement of the friend can bear? *
     What strength withstand assault of severance?"

Then sobs burst from her breast, and she recited also these
couplets,

"What's this?  I pass by tombs, and fondly greet *
     My friends' last homes, but send they no reply:
For saith each friend, 'Reply how can I make *
     When pledged to clay and pawned to stones I lie?
Earth has consumed my charms and I forget *
     Thy love, from kith and kin poor banisht I.' "

While she was thus, behold, Aziz came in to her and when she saw
him, she fell down, fainting for very joy.  He sprinkled water on
her face till she revived and rising, took him in her arms and
strained him to her breast, whilst he in like manner embraced
her.  Then he greeted her and she greeted him, and she asked the
reason of his long absence, whereupon he told her all that had
befallen him from first to last and informed her how Taj al-Muluk
had given him an hundred loads of monies and stuffs.  At this she
rejoiced, and Aziz abode with his mother in his native town,
weeping for what mishaps had happened to him with the daughter of
Dalilah the Wily One, even her who had castrated [FN#56] him. 
Such was the case with Aziz; but as regards Taj al-Muluk he went
in unto his beloved, the Princess Dunya, and abated her
maidenhead.  Then King Shahriman proceeded to equip his daughter
for her journey with her husband and father in law, and bade
bring them provaunt and presents and rarities.  So they loaded
their beasts and set forth, whilst King Shahriman escorted them,
by way of farewell, three days' journey on their way, till King
Shah Sulayman conjured him to return.  So he took leave of them
and turned back, and Taj al-Muluk and his wife and father fared
for wards night and day, with their troops, till they drew near
their capital.  As soon as the news of their coming spread
abroad, the folk decorated for them the city,--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the One Hundred and Thirty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Shah
Sulayman drew near his capital, the folk decorated the city for
him and for his son.  So they entered in state and the King,
sitting on his throne with his son by his side, gave alms and
largesse and loosed all who were in his jails.  Then he held a
second bridal for his son, and the sound of the singing women and
players upon instruments was never silent for a whole month, and
the tire women stinted not to adorn the Lady Dunya and display
her in various dresses; and she tired not of the displaying nor
did the women weary of gazing on her.  Then Taj al-Muluk, after
having foregathered awhile with his father and mother, took up
his sojourn with his wife, and they abode in all joyance of life
and in fairest fortune, till there came to them the Destroyer of
all delights. [FN#57] Now when the Wazir Dandan had ended the tale
of Taj al-Muluk and the Lady Dunya, Zau al-Makan said to him, "Of
a truth, it is the like of thee who lighten the mourner's heart
and who deserve to be the boon companions of Kings and to guide
their policy in the right way." All this befel and they were
still besieging Constantinople, where they lay four whole years,
till they yearned after their native land; and the troops
murmured, being weary of vigil and besieging and the endurance of
fray and foray by night and by day.  Then King Zau al-Makan
summoned Rustam and Bahram and Tarkash, and when they were in
presence bespoke them thus, "Know that we have lain here all
these years and we have not won to our wish; nay, we have but
gained increase of care and concern; for indeed we came, thinking
to take our man bote for King Omar bin al-Nu'uman and in so doing
my brother Sharrkan was slain; so is our sorrow grown to sorrows
twain and our affliction to afflictions twain.  All this came of
the old woman Zat al-Dawahi, for it was she who slew the Sultan
in his kingdom and carried off his wife, the Queen Sophia; nor
did this suffice her, but she must put another cheat on us and
cut the throat of my brother Sharrkan and indeed I have bound
myself and sworn by the solemnest oaths that there is no help but
I take blood wit from her.  What say ye?  Ponder my address and
answer me." Then they bowed their heads and answered, "It is for
the Wazir Dandan to opine." So the Minister came forward and
said, "Know O King of the Age!  it booteth us nought to tarry
here; and 'tis my counsel that we strike camp and return to our
own country, there to abide for a certain time and after that we
should return for a razzia upon the worshippers of idols."
Replied the King, "This rede is right, for indeed the folk weary
for a sight of their families, and I am an other who is also
troubled with yearning after my son Kanmakan and my brother 's
daughter Kuzia Fakan, for she is in Damascus and I know not how
is her case." When the troops heard this report, they rejoiced
and blessed the Wazir Dandan.  Then the King bade the crier call
the retreat after three days.  They fell to preparing for the
march, and, on the fourth day, they beat the big drums and
unfurled the banners and the army set forth, the Wazir Danden in
the van and the King riding in the mid battle, with the Grand
Chamberlain by his side; and all journeyed without ceasing, night
and day, till they reached Baghdad city.  The folk rejoiced in
their return, and care and fear ceased from them whilst the stay
at homes met the absentees and each Emir betook him to his own
house.  As for Zau al-Makan he marched up to the Palace and went
in to his son Kanmakan, who had now reached the age of seven; and
who used to go down to the weapon plain and ride.  As soon as the
King was rested of his journey, he entered the Hammam with his
son, and returning, seated himself on his sofa of state, whilst
the Wazir Dandan took up his station before him and the Emirs and
Lords of the realm presented themselves and stood in attendance
upon him.  Then Zau al-Makan called for his comrade, the Fireman,
who had befriended him in his wanderings; and, when he came into
presence, the King rose to do him honour and seated him by his
side.  Now he had acquainted the Wazir with all the kindness and
good turns which the Stoker had done him; and he found that the
wight had waxed fat and burly with rest and good fare, so that
his neck was like an elephant's throat and his face like a
dolphin's belly.  Moreover, he was grown dull of wit, for that he
had never stirred from his place; so at first he knew not the
King by his aspect.  But Zau al-Makan came up to him smiling in
his face, and greeted him after the friendliest fashion, saying,
"How soon hast thou forgotten me?" With this the Fireman roused
himself and, looking steadfastly at Zau al-Makan, made sure that
he knew him; whereupon he sprang hastily to his feet and
exclaimed, "O my friend, who hath made thee Sultan?" Then Zau al-
Makan laughed at him and the Wazir, coming up to him expounded
the whole story to him and said, "In good sooth he was thy
brother and thy friend; and now he is King of the land and needs
must thou get great good of him.  So I charge thee, if he say,
'Ask a boon of me,' ask not but for some great thing; for thou
art very dear to him." Quoth the Fireman, "I fear lest, if I ask
of him aught, he may not choose to give it or may not be able to
grant it." Quoth the Wazir, "Have no care; whatsoever thou askest
he will give thee." Rejoined the Stoker, "By Allah, I must at
once ask of him a thing that is in my thought: every night I
dream of it and implore Almighty Allah to vouchsafe it to me."
Said the Wazir, "Take heart; by Allah, if thou ask of him the
government of Damascus, in place of his brother, he would surely
give it thee and make thee Governor." With this the Stoker rose
to is feet and Zau al-Makan signed to him to sit; but he refused,
saying, "Allah forfend!  The days are gone by of my sitting in
thy presence.' Answered the Sultan, "Not so, they endure even
now.  Thou west in very deed the cause that I am at present alive
and, by Allah, whatever thing most desired thou requirest of me,
I will give that same to thee.  But ask thou first of Allah, and
then of me!" He said, "O my lord, I fear" "Fear not," quoth the
Sultan He continued, "I fear to ask aught and that thou shouldst
refuse it to me and it is only" At this the King laughed and
replied, "If thou require of me the half of my kingdom I would
share it with thee: so ask what thou wilt and leave talking."
Repeated the Fireman "I fear" "Don't fear," quoth the King.  He
went on, "I fear lest I ask a thing and thou be not able to grant
it." Upon this the Sultan waxed wroth and cried, "Ask what thou
wilt." Then said he, "I ask, first of Allah and then of thee,
that thou write me a patent of Syndicate over all the Firemen of
the baths in the Holy City, Jerusalem." The Sultan and all
present laughed and Zau al-Makan said, "Ask something more than
this." He replied, "O my lord, said I not I feared that thou
wouldst not choose to give me what I should ask or that thou be
not able to grant it?" Therewith the Wazir signed him with his
foot once and twice and thrice, and every time he began, "I ask
of thee" Quoth the Sultan, "Ask and be speedy." So he said, "I
ask thee to make me Chief of the Scavengers in the Holy City of
Jerusalem, or in.  Damascus town." Then all those who were
present fell on their backs with laughter and the Wazir beat him;
whereupon he turned to the Minister and said to him, "What art
thou that thou shouldest beat me?  'Tis no fault of mine: didst
thou not thyself bid me ask some important thing?" And he added,
"Let me go to my own land." With this, the Sultan knew that he
was jesting and took patience with him awhile; then turned to him
and said, "O my brother, ask of me some important thing,
befitting our dignity." So the Stoker said, "O King of the Age, I
ask first of Allah and then of thee, that thou make me Viceroy of
Damascus in the place of thy brother;" and the King replied,
"Allah granteth thee this." Thereupon the Fireman kissed ground
before him and he bade set him a chair in his rank and vested him
with a viceroy's habit.  Then he wrote him a patent and sealed it
with his own seal, and said to the Wazir Dandan, "None shall go
with him but thou; and when thou makest the return journey, do
thou bring with thee my brother's daughter, Kuzia Fakan."
"Hearken ing and obedience," answered the Minister; and, taking
the Fire man, went down with him and made ready for the march. 
Then the King appointed for the Stoker servants and suite, and
gave him a new litter and a princely equipage and said to the
Emirs, "Whoso loveth me, let him honour this man and offer him a
handsome present." So each and every of the Emirs brought him his
gift according to his competence; and the King named him Zibl
Khan, [FN#58] and conferred on him the honourable surname of al-
Mujahid. [FN#59] As soon as the gear was ready, he went up with
the Wazir Dandan to the King, that he might take leave of him and
ask his permission to depart.  The King rose to him and embraced
him, and charged him to do justice between his subjects and bade
him make ready for fight against the Infidels after two years. 
Then they took leave of each other and the King, [FN#60] the
Fighter for the Faith highs Zibl Khan, having been again exhorted
by Zau al-Makan to deal fairly with his subjects, set out on his
journey, after the Emirs had brought him Mamelukes and eunuchs,
even to five thousand in number, who rode after him.  The Grand
Chamberlain also took horse, as did Bahram, captain of the
Daylamites, and Rustam, captain of the Persians, and Tarkash,
captain of the Arabs, who attended to do him service; and they
ceased not riding with him three days' journey by way of honour. 
Then, taking their leave of him, they returned to Baghdad and the
Sultan Zibl Khan and the Wazir Dandan fared on, with their suite
and troops, till they drew near Damascus.  Now news was come,
upon the wings of birds, to the notables of Damascus, that King
Zau al-Makan had made Sultan over Damascus a King named Zibl Khan
and surnamed Al-Mujahid; so when he reached the city he found it
dressed in his honour and everyone in the place came out to gaze
on him.  The new Sultan entered Damascus in a splendid progress
and went up to the citadel, where he sat down upon his chair of
state, whilst the Wazir Dandan stood in attendance on him, to
acquaint him with the ranks of the Emirs and their stations. 
Then the Grandees came in to him and kissed hands and called down
blessings on him.  The new King, Zibl Khan, received them
graciously and bestowed on them dresses of honour and various
presents and bounties; after which he opened the treasuries and
gave largesse to the troops, great and small.  Then he governed
and did justice and proceeded to equip the Lady Kuzia Fakan,
daughter of King Sharrkan, appointing her a litter of silken
stuff.  Moreover he furnished the Wazir Dandan equally well for
the return journey and offered him a gift of coin but he refused,
saying, "Thou art near the time appointed by the King, and haply
thou wilt have need of money, or after this we may send to seek
of thee funds for the Holy War or what not." Now when the Wazir
was ready to march, Sultan al-Mujahid mounted to bid the Minister
farewell and brought Kuzia Fakan to him, and made her enter the
litter and sent with her ten damsels to do her service. 
Thereupon they set forward, whilst King "Fighter for the Faith"
returned to his government that he might order affairs and get
ready his munitions of war, awaiting such time as King Zau al-
Makan should send a requisition to him.  Such was the case with
Sultan Zibl Khan, but as regards the Wazir Dandan, he ceased not
faring forward and finishing off the stages, in company with
Kuzia Fakan till they came to Ruhbah [FN#61] after a month's
travel and thence pushed on, till he drew near Baghdad.  Then he
sent to announce his arrival to King Zau al-Makan who, when he
heard this, took horse and rode out to meet him.  The Wazir
Dandan would have dismounted, but the King conjured him not to do
so and urged his steed till he came up to his side.  Then he
questioned him of Zibl Khan highs Al-Mujahid, whereto the Wazir
replied that he was well and that he had brought with him Kuzia
Fakan the daughter of his brother.  At this the King rejoiced and
said to Dandan, "Down with thee and rest thee from the fatigue of
the journey for three days, after which come to me again."
Replied the Wazir "With joy and gratitude," and betook himself to
his own house, whilst the King rode up to his Palace and went in
to his brother's daughter, Kuzia Fakan, a girl of eight years
old.  When he saw her, he rejoiced in her and sorrowed for her
sire; then he bade make for her clothes and gave her splendid
jewelry and ornaments, and ordered she be lodged with his son
Kanmakan in one place.  So they both grew up the brightest of the
people of their time and the bravest; but Kuzia Fakan became a
maiden of good sense and understanding and knowledge of the
issues of events, whilst Kanmakan approved him a generous youth
and freehanded, taking no care in the issue of aught.  And so
they continued till each of them attained the age of twelve.  Now
Kuzia Fakan used to ride a horseback and fare forth with her
cousin into the open plain and push forward and range at large
with him in the word; and they both learnt to smite with swords
and spike with spears.  But when they had reached the age of
twelve, King Zau al-Makan, having completed his preparations and
provisions and munitions for Holy War, summoned the Wazir Dandan
and said to him, "Know that I have set mind on a thing, which I
will discover to thee, and I want shine opinion thereon; so do
thou with speed return me a reply." Asked the Wazir, "What is
that, O King of the Age?"; and the other answered, "I am resolved
to make my son Kanmakan Sultan and rejoice in him in my lifetime
and do battle before him till death overtake me.  What reckest
thou of this?" The Wazir kissed the ground before the King and
replied, "Know, O King and Sultan mine, Lord of the Age and the
time!  that which is in thy mind is indeed good, save that it is
now no tide to carry it out, for two reasons; the first, that thy
son Kanmakan is yet of tender years; and the second, that it
often befalleth him who maketh his son King in his life time, to
live but a little while thereafterward. [FN#62]  And this is my
reply." Rejoined the King, "Know, O Wazir that we will make the
Grand Chamberlain guardian over him, for he is now one of the
family and he married my sister, so that he is to me as a
brother." Quoth the Wazir, "Do what seemeth good to thee: we have
only to obey thine orders." Then the King sent for the Grand
Chamberlain whom they brought into the presence together with the
Lords of the realm and he said to them, "Ye know that this my son
Kanmakan is the first cavalier of the age, and that he hath no
peer in striking with the sword and lunging with the lance; and
now I appoint him to be Sultan over you and I make the Grand
Chamberlain, his uncle, guardian over him." Replied the
Chamberlain, "I am but a tree which thy bounty hath planted"; and
Zau al-Makan said, "O Chamberlain, verily this my son Kanmakan
and my niece Kuzia Fakan are brothers' children; so I hereby
marry her to him and I call those present to witness thereof."
Then he made over to his son such treasures as no tongue can
describe, and going in to his sister, Nuzhat al-Zaman, told her
what he had done, whereat she was a glad woman and said, "Verily
the twain are my children: Allah preserve thee to them and keep
thy life for them many a year!" Replied he, "O my sister, I have
accomplished in this world all my heart desired and I have no
fear for my son!  yet it were well thou have an eye on him, and
an eye on his mother." And he charged the Chamberlain and Nuzhat
al-Zaman with the care of his son and niece and wife, and this he
continued to do nights and days till he fell sick and deemed
surely that he was about to drink the cup of death; so he took to
his bed, whilst the Chamberlain busied himself with ordering the
folk and realm.  At the end of the year, the King summoned his
son Kanmakan and the Wazir Dandan and said, "O my son, after my
death this Wazir is thy sire; for know that I am about to leave
this house of life transitory for the house of eternity.  And
indeed I have fulfilled my will of this world; yet there
remaineth in my heart one regret which may Allah dispel through
and by thy hands." Asked his son, "What regret is that, O my
father?" Answered Zau al-Makan, "O my son, the sole regret of me
is that I die without having avenged thy grandfather, Omar bin
al-Nu'uman, and thine uncle, Sharrkan, on an old woman whom they
call Zat al-Dawahi; but, if Allah grant thee aid, sleep not till
thou take thy wreak on her, and so wipe out the shame we have
suffered at the Infidel's hands; and beware of the old hag's wile
and do what the Wazir Dandan shall advise thee; because he from
old time hath been the pillar of our realm." And his son assented
to what he said.  Then the King's eyes ran over with tears and
his sickness redoubled on him; whereupon his brother in law, the
Chamberlain took charge over the country and, being a capable
man, he judged and bade and forbade for the whole of that year,
while Zau al-Makan was occupied with his malady.  And his
sickness was sore upon him for four years, during which the Chief
Chamberlain sat in his stead and gave full satisfaction to the
commons and the nobles; and all the country blessed his rule. 
Such was the case with Zau al-Makan and the Chamberlain, but as
regards the King's son, he busied himself only with riding and
lunging with lance and shooting with shaft, and thus also did the
daughter of his uncle, Kuzia Fakan; for he and she were wont to
fare forth at the first of the day and return at nightfall, when
she would go in to her mother, and he would go in to his mother
whom he ever found sitting in tears by the head of his father's
couch.  Then he would tend his father all night long till
daybreak, when he would go forth again with his cousin according
to their wont.  Now Zau al-Makan's pains and sufferings were
lonesome upon him and he wept and began versifying with these
couplets,

"Gone is my strength, told is my tale of days *
     And, lookye!  I am left as thou dost see:
In honour's day most honoured wont to be, *
     And win the race from all my company
Would Heaven before my death I might behold *
     My son in seat of empire sit for me
And rush upon his foes, to take his wreak *
     With sway of sword and lance lunged gallantly:
In this world and the next I am undone, *
     Except the Lord vouchsafe me clemency."

When he had ended repeating these verses, he laid his head on his
pillow and closed his eyes and slept.  Then saw he in his sleep
one who said to him, "Rejoice, for thy son shall fill the lands
with justest sway; and he shall rule them and him shall the
lieges obey."; Then he awoke from his dream gladdened by the good
tidings he had seen, and after a few days, Death smote him, and
because of his dying great grief fell on the people of Baghdad,
and simple and gentle mourned for him.  But Time passed over him,
as though he had never been [FN#63] and Kanmakan's estate was
changed; for the people of Baghdad set him aside and put him and
his family in a place apart.  Now when his mother saw this, she
fell into the sorriest of plights and said, "There is no help but
that I go to the Grand Chamberlain, and I must hope for the
aidance of the Subtle, the All-Wise!" Then she rose from her
place and betook herself to the house of the Chamberlain who was
now become Sultan, and she found him sitting upon his carpet.  So
she went in to his wife, Nuzhat al-Zaman, and wept with sore
weeping and said unto her, "Verily the dead hath no friend!  May
Allah never bring you to want as long as your age and the years
endure, and may you cease not to rule justly over rich and poor. 
Thine ears have heard and thine eyes have seen all that was ours
of kingship and honour and dignity and wealth and fair fortune of
life and condition; and now Time hath turned upon us, and fate
and the world have betrayed us and wrought in hostile way with
us, wherefore I come to thee craving thy favours, I from whom
favours were craved: for when a man dieth, women and maidens are
brought to despisal." And she repeated these couplets,

"Suffice thee Death such marvels can enhance, *
     And severed lives make lasting severance:
Man's days are marvels, and their stations are *
     But water-pits [FN#64] of misery and mischance.
Naught wrings my heart save loss of noble friends, *
     Girt round by rings of hard, harsh circumstance."

When Nuzhat al-Zaman heard these words, she remembered her
brother, Zau al-Makan, and his son Kanmakan, and, making her draw
near to her and showing her honour, she said, "Verily at this
moment, by Allah, I am grown rich and thou art poor; now by the
Lord!  we did not cease to seek thee out, but we feared to wound
thy heart lest thou shouldest fancy our gifts to thee an alms
gift.  Withal, whatso weal we now enjoy is from thee and thy
husband; so our house is thy house and our place thy place, and
thine is all our wealth and what goods we have belong to thee."
Then she robed her in sumptuous robes and set apart for her a
place in the Palace adjoining her own; and they abode therein,
she and her son, in all delight of life.  And Nuzhat al-Zaman
clothed him also in Kings' raiment and gave to them both especial
handmaids for their service.  After a little, she related to her
husband the sad case of the widow of her brother, Zau al-Makan,
whereat his eyes filled with tears and he said, "Wouldest thou
see the world after thee, look thou upon the world after other
than thyself.  Then entreat her honourably and enrich her
poverty."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

      When It was the One Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Nuzhat
Al-Zaman related to her husband the sad case of the widow of her
brother, Zau al-Makan, the Chamberlain said, "Entreat her
honourably and enrich her poverty." Thus far concerning Nuzhat
al-Zaman and her consort and the relict of Zau al-Makan; but as
regards Kanmakan and his cousin Kuzia Fakan, they grew up and
flourished till they waxed like unto two fruit-laden boughs or
two shining moons; and they reached the age of fifteen.  And she
was indeed the fairest of maids who are modestly veiled, lovely
faced with smooth cheeks graced, and slender waist on heavy hips
based; and her shape was the shaft's thin line and her lips were
sweeter than old wine and the nectar of her mouth as it were the
fountain Salsabil [FN#65]; even as saith the poet in these two
couplets describing one like her,

"As though ptisane of wine on her lips honey dew *
     Dropt from the ripened grapes her mouth in clusters grew
And, when her frame thou doublest, and low bends her vine, *
     Praise her Creator's might no creature ever knew."

Of a truth Allah had united in her every charm: her shape would
shame the branch of waving tree and the rose before her cheeks
craved lenity; and the honey dew of her lips of wine made jeer,
however old and clear, and she gladdened heart and beholder with
joyous cheer, even as saith of her the poet,

"Goodly of gifts is she, and charm those perfect eyes, *
     With lashes shaming Kohl and all the fair ones Kohl'd [FN#66]
And from those eyne the glances pierce the lover's heart, *
     Like sword in Mir al-Muminina Ali's hold."

And (the relator continueth) as for Kanmakan, he became unique in
loveliness and excelling in perfection no less; none could even
him in qualities as in seemliness and the sheen of velour between
his eyes was espied, testifying for him while against him it
never testified.  The hardest hearts inclined to his side; his
eyelids bore lashes black as by Kohl; and he was of surpassing
worth in body and soul.  And when the down of lips and cheeks
began to sprout bards and poets sang for him far and near,

"Appeared not my excuse till hair had clothed his cheek, *
     And gloom o'ercrept that side-face (sight to stagger!)
A fawn, when eyes would batten on his charms, *
     Each glance deals thrust like point of Khanjar-dagger."

And saith another,

"His lovers' souls have drawn upon his cheek *
     An ant that perfected its rosy light:
I marvel at such martyrs Laza-pent *
     Who yet with greeny robes of Heaven are dight.'' [FN#67]

Now it chanced one holiday, that Kuzia Fakan fared forth to make
festival with certain kindred of the court, and she went
surrounded by her handmaids.  And indeed beauty encompassed her,
the roses of her cheeks dealt envy to their mole; from out her
smiling lips levee flashed white, gleaming like the
chamomile [FN#68]; and Kanmakan began to turn about her and devour
her with his sight, for she was the moon of resplendent light. 
Then he took heart and giving his tongue a start began to
improvise,

"When shall the disappointed heart be healed of severance, *
     And lips of Union smile at ceasing of our hard mischance?
Would Heaven I knew shall come some night, and with it surely
     bring * Meeting with friend who like myself endureth
     sufferance." [FN#69]

When Kuzia Fakan heard these couplets, she showed vexation and
disapproval and, putting on a haughty and angry air, said to him,
"Dost thou name me in thy verse, to shame me amongst folk?  By
Allah, if thou turn not from this talk, I will assuredly complain
of thee to the Grand Chamberlain, Sultan of Khorasan and Baghdad
and lord of justice and equity; that disgrace and punishment may
befal thee!" Kanmakan made no reply for anger but he returned to
Baghdad; and Kuzia Fakan also returned to her palace and
complained of her cousin to her mother, who said to her, "O my
daughter, haply he meant thee no harm, and is he aught but an
orphan?  Withal, he said nought of reproach to thee; so beware
thou tell none of this, lest perchance it come to e Sultan's ears
and he cut short his life and blot out his name and make it even
as yesterday, whose memory hath passed away." However, Kanmakan's
love for Kuzia Fakan spread abroad in Baghdad, so that the women
talked of it.  Moreover, his breast became straitened and his
patience waned and he knew not what to do, yet he could not hide
his condition from the world.  Then longed he to give vent to the
pangs he endured, by reason of the lowe of separation; but he
feared her rebuke and her wrath; so he began improvising,

"Now is my dread to incur reproaches, which *
     Disturb her temper and her mind obscure,
Patient I'll bear them; e'en as generous youth his case to
     cure.'' * Beareth the burn of brand his case to
     cure." [FN#70]

And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Grand Chamberlain became Sultan they named him King Sasan; and
after he had assumed the throne he governed the people in
righteous way.  Now as he was giving audience one day, Kanmakan's
verses came to his knowledge.  Thereupon he repented him of the
past and going in to his wife Nuzhat al-Zaman, said to her,
"Verily, to join Halfah grass and fire, [FN#71] is the greatest of
risks, and man may not be trusted with woman, so long as eye
glanceth and eyelid quivereth.  Now thy brother's son, Kanmakan,
is come to man's estate and it behoveth us to forbid him access
to the rooms where anklets trinkle, and it is yet more needful to
forbid thy daughter the company of men, for the like of her
should be kept in the Harim." Replied she, "Thou sayest sooth, O
wise King!" Next day came Kanmakan according to his wont; and,
going in to his aunt saluted her.  She returned his salutation
and said to him, "O my son!  I have some what to say to thee
which I would fain leave unsaid; yet I must tell it thee despite
my inclination." Quoth he, "Speak;" and quoth she, Know then that
thy sire the Chamberlain, the father of Kuzia Fakan, hath heard
of the verses thou madest anent her, and hath ordered that she be
kept in the Harim and out of thy reach; if therefore, O my son,
thou want anything from us, I will send it to thee from behind
the door; and thou shalt not look upon Kuzia Fakan nor shalt thou
return hither from this day forth." When he heard this he arose
and withdrew with out speaking a single word; and, betaking
himself to his mother related what his aunt had said.  She
observed, "This all cometh of thine overtalking.  Thou knowest
that the news of thy passion for Kuzia Fakan is noised abroad and
the tattle hath spread everywhere how thou eatest their food and
thereafter thou courtest their daughter." Rejoined he, "And who
should have her but I?  She is the daughter of my father's
brother and I have the best of rights to her." Retorted his
mother, "These are idle words.  Be silent, lest haply thy talk
come to King Sasan's ears and it prove the cause of thy losing
her and the reason of thy ruin and increase of thine affliction. 
They have not sent us any supper to-night and we shall die an
hungered; and were we in any land but this, we were already dead
of famine or of shame for begging our bread." When Kanmakan heard
these words from his mother, his regrets redoubled; his eyes ran
over with tears and he complained and began improvising,

"Minish this blame I ever bear from you: *
     My heart loves her to whom all love is due:
Ask not from me of patience jot or little, *
     Divorce of Patience by God's House!  I rue:
What blamers preach of patience I unheed; *
     Here am I, love path firmly to pursue!
Indeed they bar me access to my love, *
     Here am I by God's ruth no ill I sue!  
Good sooth my bones, whenas they hear thy name, *
     Quail as birds quailed when Nisus o'er them flew: [FN#72]
Ah! say to them who blame my love that I *
     Will love that face fair cousin till I die." 

And when he had ended his verses he said to his mother, "I have
no longer a place in my aunt's house nor among these people, but
I will go forth from the palace and abide in the corners of the
city." So he and his mother left the court; and, having sought an
abode in the neighbourhood of the poorer sort, there settled; but
she used to go from time to time to King Sasan's palace and
thence take daily bread for herself and her son.  As this went on
Kuzia Fakan took her aside one day and said to her, "Alas, O my
naunty, how is it with thy son?" Replied she, "O my daughter,
sooth to say, he is tearful-eyed and heavy hearted, being fallen
into the net of thy love." And she repeated to her the couplets
he had made; whereupon Kuzia Fakan wept and said, "By Allah!  I
rebuked him not for his words, nor for ill-will to him, but
because I feared for him the malice of foes.  Indeed my passion
for him is double that he feeleth for me; my tongue may not
describe my yearning for him; and were it not for the extravagant
wilfulness of his words and the wanderings of his wit, my father
had not cut off from him favours that besit, nor had decreed unto
him exclusion and prohibition as fit.  However, man's days bring
nought but change, and patience in all case is most becoming:
peradventure He who ordained our severance will vouchsafe us
reunion!" And she began versifying in these two couplets,

"O son of mine uncle!  same sorrow I bear, *
     And suffer the like of thy cark and thy care
Yet hide I from man what I suffer for pine; *
     Hide it too, and such secret to man never bare!"

When his mother heard this from her, she thanked her and blessed
her: then she left her and acquainted her son with what she had
said; whereupon his desire for her increased and he took heart,
being eased of his despair and the turmoil of his love and care. 
And he said, "By Allah, I desire none but her!"; and he began
improvising,

"Leave this blame, I will list to no flout of my foe! *
     I divulged a secret was told me to keep:
He is lost to my sight for whose union I yearn, *
     And I watch all the while he can slumber and sleep."

So the days and nights went by whilst Kanmakan lay tossing upon
coals of fire, [FN#73] till he reached the age of seventeen; and
his beauty had waxt perfect and his wits were at their brightest. 
One night, as he lay awake, he communed with himself and said,
"Why should I keep silence till I waste away and see not my
lover?  Fault have I none save poverty; so, by Allah, I am
resolved to remove me from this region and wander over the wild
and the word; for my position in this city is a torture and I
have no friend nor lover therein to comfort me; wherefore I am
determined to distract myself by absence from my native land till
I die and take my rest after this shame and tribulation." And he
began to improvise and recited these couplets,

"Albeit my vitals quiver 'neath this ban; *
     Before the foe myself I'll ne'er unman!
So pardon me, my vitals are a writ *
     Whose superscription are my tears that ran:
Heigh ho!  my cousin seemeth Houri may *
     Come down to earth by reason of Rizwan:
'Scapes not the dreadful sword lunge of her look *
     Who dares the glancing of those eyne to scan:
O'er Allah's wide spread world I'll roam and roam, *
     And from such exile win what bread I can
Yes, o'er broad earth I'll roam and save my soul, *
     All but her absence bear ing like a man
With gladsome heart I'll haunt the field of fight, *
     And meet the bravest Brave in battle van!"

So Kanmakan fared forth from the palace barefoot and he walked in
a short sleeved gown, wearing on his head a skull cap of
felt [FN#74] seven years old and carrying a scone three days
stale, and in the deep glooms of night betook himself to the
portal of al-Arij of Baghdad.  Here he waited for the gate being
opened and when it was opened, he was the first to pass through
it; and he went out at random and wandered about the wastes night
and day.  When the dark hours came, his mother sought him but
found him not; whereupon the world waxt strait upon her for all
that it was great and wide, and she took no delight in aught of
weal it supplied.  She looked for him a first day and a second
day and a third day till ten days were past, but no news of him
reached her.  Then her breast became contracted and she shrieked
and shrilled, saying, "O my son!  O my darling!  thou hast
revived my regrets.  Sufficed not what I endured, but thou must
depart from my home?  After thee I care not for food nor joy in
sleep, and naught but tears and mourning are left me.  O my son,
from what land shall I call thee?  And what town hath given thee
refuge?" Then her sobs burst out, and she began repeating these
couplets,

"Well learnt we, since you left, our grief and sorrow to
     sustain, * While bows of severance shot their shafts in
     many a railing rain:
They left me, after girthing on their selles of corduwayne *
     To fight the very pangs of death while spanned they sandy
     plain:
Mysterious through the nightly gloom there came the moan of
     dove; * A ring dove, and replied I, 'Cease thy plaint, how
     durst complain?'
If, by my life, her heart, like mine, were full of pain and 
    pine * She had not decks her neck with ring nor sole with
     ruddy stain. [FN#75]
Fled is mine own familiar friend, bequeathing me a store *
     Of parting pang and absence ache to suffer evermore."

Then she abstained from food and drink and gave herself up to
excessive tear shedding and lamentation.  Her grief became public
property far and wide and all the people of the town and country
side wept with her and cried, "Where is thine eye, O Zau al-
Makan?" And they bewailed the rigours of Time, saying, "Would
Heaven we knew what hath befallen Kanmakan that he fled his
native town, and chased himself from the place where his father
used to fill all in hungry case and do justice and grace?" And
his mother redoubled her weeping and wailing till the news of
Kanmakan's departure came to King Sasan.--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

        When it was the One Hundred and Fortieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that came to
King Sasan the tidings of the departure of Kanmakan, through the
Chief Emirs who said to him, "Verily he is the son of our Sovran
and the seed of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman and it hath reached us
that he hath exiled himself from the land." When King Sasan heard
these words, he was wroth with them and ordered one of them to be
hanged by way of silencing him, whereat the fear of him fell upon
the hearts of all the other Grandees and they dared not speak one
word.  Then he called to mind all the kindness that Zau al-Makan
had done him, and how he had charged him with the care of his
son; wherefore he grieved for Kanmakan and said, "Needs must I
have search made for him in all countries." So he summoned
Tarkash and bade him choose an hundred horse and wend with them
in quest of the Prince.  Accordingly he went out and was absent
ten days, after which he returned and said, "I can learn no
tidings of him and have hit on no trace of him, nor can any tell
me aught of him." Upon this King Sasan repented him of that which
he had done by the Prince; whilst his mother abode in unrest
continual nor would patience come at her call: and thus passed
over her twenty days in heaviness all.  This is how it fared with
these; but as regards Kanmakan, when he left Baghdad, he went
forth perplexed about his case and knowing not whither he should
go: so he fared on alone through the desert for three days and
saw neither footman nor horseman; withal, his sleep fled and his
wakefulness redoubled, for he pined after his people and his
homestead.  He ate of the herbs of the earth and drank of its
flowing waters and siesta'd under its trees at hours of noontide
heats, till he turned from that road to another way and,
following it other three days, came on the fourth to a land of
green leas, dyed with the hues of plants and trees and with
sloping valley sides made to please, abounding with the fruits of
the earth.  It had drunken of the cups of the cloud, to the sound
of thunders rolling loud and the song of the turtle-dove gently
sough'd, till its hill slopes were brightly verdant and its
fields were sweetly fragrant.  Then Kanmakan recalled his
father's city Baghdad, and for excess of emotion he broke out
into verse,

"I roam, and roaming hope I to return; *
     Yet of returning see not how or when:
I went for love of one I could not win, *
     Nor way of 'scaping ills that pressed could ken."

When he ended his recital he wept, but presently he wiped away
his tears and ate of the fruits of the earth enough for his
present need.  Then he made the Wuzu-ablution and prayed the
ordained prayers which he had neglected all this time; and he sat
resting in that place through the livelong day.  When night came
he slept and ceased not sleeping till midnight, when he awoke and
heard a human voice declaiming these couplets,

"What's life to me, unless I see the pearly sheen *
     Of teeth I love, and sight that glorious mien?
Pray for her Bishops who in convents reign, *
     Vying to bow before that heavenly queen.
And Death is lighter than the loved one's wrath, *
     Whose phantom haunts me seen in every scene:
O joy of cup companions, when they meet, *
     And loved and lover o'er each other lean!
E'en more in time of spring, the lord of flowers, *
     When fragrant is the world with bloom and green:
Drainer of vine-juice!  up wi' thee, for now *
     Earth is a Heaven where sweet waters flow. [FN#76]"

When Kanmakan heard these distichs his sorrows surged up; his
tears ran down his cheeks like freshets and flames of fire darted
into his heart.  So he rose to see who it was that spake these
words, but saw none for the thickness of the gloom; whereupon
passion increased on him and he was frightened and restlessness
possessed him.  He descended from his place to the sole of the
valley and walked along the banks of the stream, till he heard
the same voice sighing heavy sighs and reciting these couplets,

"Tho' 'tis thy wont to hide thy love perforce, *
     Yet weep on day of parting and divorce!
Twixt me and my dear love were plighted vows; *
     Pledge of reunion, fonder intercourse:
With joy inspires my heart and deals it rest *
     Zephyr, whose coolness doth desire enforce.
O Sa'ada, [FN#77] thinks of me that anklet wearer? *
     Or parting broke she troth without remorse?
And say!  shall nights foregather us, and we *
     Of suffered hardships tell in soft discourse?
Quoth she, 'Thou'rt daft for us and fey'; quoth I, *
     ' 'Sain thee!  how many a friend hast turned to corse!'
If taste mine eyes sweet sleep while she's away, *
     Allah with loss of her these eyne accurse.
O wounds in vitals mine!  for cure they lack *
     Union and dewy lips' sweet theriack." [FN#78]

When Kanmakan heard this verse again spoken by the same voice yet
saw no one, he knew that the speaker was a lover like unto
himself, debarred from union with her who loved him; and he said
to himself, "'Twere fitting that this man should lay his head to
my head and become my comrade in this my strangerhood." [FN#79] 
Then he hailed the speaker and cried out to him, saying, "O thou
who farest in sombrest night, draw near to me and tell me thy
tale haply thou shalt find me one who will succour thee in thy
sufferings." And when the owner of the voice heard these words,
he cried out, "O thou that respondest to my complaint and
wouldest hear my history, who art thou amongst the knights?  Art
thou human or Jinni?  Answer me speedily ere thy death draw near
for I have wandered in this desert some twenty days and have seen
no one nor heard any voice but thy voice." At these words
Kanmakan said to himself, "This one's case is like my case, for
I, even I, have wandered twenty days, nor during my wayfare have
I seen man or heard voice:" and he added, "I will make him no
answer till day arise." So he was silent, and the voice again
called out to him, saying, "O thou that callest, if thou be of
the Jinn fare in peace and, if thou be man, stay awhile till the
day break stark and the night flee with the dark." The speaker
abode in his place and Kanmakan did likewise and the twain in
reciting verses never failed, and wept tears that railed till the
light of day began loom and the night departed with its gloom. 
Then Kanmakan looked at the other and found him to be of the
Badawi Arabs, a youth in the flower of his age; clad in worn
clothes and bearing in baldrick a rusty sword which he kept
sheathed, and the signs of love longing were apparent on him.  He
went up to him and accosted him and saluted him, and the Badawi
returned the salute and greeted him with courteous wishes for his
long life, but somewhat despised him, seeing his tender years and
his condition, which was that of a pauper.  So he said to him, "O
youth, of what tribe art thou and to whom art thou kin among the
Arabs; and what is thy history that thou goest by night, after
the fashion of knights?  Indeed thou spakest to me in the dark
words such as are spoken of none but doughty cavaliers and lion-
like warriors; and now I hold thy life in hand.  But I have
compassion on thee by reason of thy green years; so I will make
thee my companion and thou shalt go with me, to do me service."
When Kanmakan heard him speak these unseemly words, after showing
him such skill in verse, he knew that he despised him and would
presume with him; therefore he answered him with soft and well-
chosen speech, saying, "O Chief of the Arabs, leave my tenderness
of age and tell me why thou wanderest by night in the desert
reciting verses.  Thou talkest, I see, of my serving thee; who
then art thou and what moved thee to talk this wise?" Answered
he, "Hark ye, boy!  I am Sabbah, son of Rammah bin Humam. [FN#80] 
My people are of the Arabs of Syria and I have a cousin, Najmah
highs, who to all that look on her brings delight.  And when my
father died I was brought up in the house of his brother, the
father of Najmah; but as soon I grew up and my uncle's daughter
became a woman, they secluded her from me and me from her, seeing
that I was poor and without money in pouch.  Then the Chiefs of
the Arabs and the heads of the tribes rebuked her sire, and he
was abashed before them and consented to give me my cousin, but
upon condition that I should bring him as her dower fifty head of
horses and fifty dromedaries which travel ten days [FN#81] without
a halt and fifty camels laden with wheat and a like number laden
with barley, together with ten black slaves and ten handmaids. 
Thus the weight he set upon me was beyond my power to bear; for
he exacted more than the marriage settlement as by law
established.  So here am I, travelling from Syria to Irak, and I
have passed twenty days with out seeing other than thyself; yet I
mean to go to Baghdad that I may ascertain what merchant men of
wealth and importance start thence.  Then will I fare forth in
their track and loot their goods, and I will slay their escort
and drive off their camels with their loads.  But what manner of
man art thou?" Replied Kanmakan, "Thy case is like unto my case,
save that my evil is more grievous than thine ill; for my cousin
is a King's daughter and the dowry of which thou hast spoken
would not content her people, nor would they be satisfied with
the like of that from me." Quoth Sabbah, "Surely thou art a fool
or thy wits for excess of passion are gathering wool!  How can
thy cousin be a King's daughter?  Thou hast no sign of royal rank
on thee, for thou art but a mendicant." Re joined Kanmakan, "O
Chief of the Arabs, let not this my case seem strange to thee;
for what happened, happened; [FN#82] and if thou desire proof of
me, I am Kanmakan, son of King Zau al-Makan, son of King Omar bin
al-Nu'uman Lord of Baghdad and the realm Khorasan; and Fortune
banned me with her tyrant ban, for my father died and my
Sultanate was taken by King Sasan.  So I fled forth from Baghdad
secretly, lest I be seen of any man, and have wandered twenty
days without any but thyself to scan.  So now I have discovered
to thee my case, and my story is as thy story and my need as thy
need." When Sabbab heard this, he cried out, "O my joy, I have
attained my desire!  I will have no loot this day but thy self;
for since thou art of the seed of Kings and hast come out in
beggar's garb, there is no help but thy people will seek thee;
and, if they find thee in any one's power, they will ransom thee
with monies galore.  So show me thy back, O my lad, and walk
before me." Answered Kanmakan, "O brother of the Arabs, act not
on this wise, for my people will not buy me with silver nor with
gold, not even with a copper dirham; and I am a poor man, having
with me neither much nor little, so cease then to be upon this
track and take me to thy comrade.  Fare we forth for the land of
Irak and wander over the world, so haply we may win dower and
marriage portion, and we may seek and enjoy our cousins' kisses
and embraces when we come back." Hearing this, Sabbah waxed
angry; his arrogance and fury redoubled and he said, "Woe to
thee!  Dost thou bandy words with me, O vilest of dogs that be? 
Turn thee thy back, or I will come down on thee with clack!"
Kanmakan smiled and answered, "Why should I turn my back for
thee?  Is there no justice in thee?  Dost thou not fear to bring
blame upon the Arab men by driving a man like myself captive, in
shame and disdain, before thou hast proved him on the plain, to
know if he be a warrior or of cowardly strain?" Upon this Sabbah
laughed and replied, "By Allah, a wonder!  Thou art a boy in
years told, but in talk thou art old.  These words should come
from none but a champion doughty and bold: what wantest thou of
justice?" Quoth Kanmakan, "If thou wilt have me thy captive, to
wend with thee and serve thee, throw down thine arms and put off
thine outer gear and come on and wrestle with me; and whichever
of us throw his opponent shall have his will of him and make him
his boy." Then Sabbah laughed and said, "I think this waste of
breath de noteth the nearness of thy death." Then he arose and
threw down his weapon and, tucking up his skirt, drew near unto
Kanmakan who also drew near and they gripped each other.  But the
Badawi found that the other had the better of him and weighed him
down as the quintal downweighs the diner; and he looked at his
legs firmly planted on the ground, and saw that they were as two
minarets [FN#83] strongly based, or two tent-poles in earth
encased, or two mountains which may not he displaced.  So he
acknowledged himself to be a failure and repented of having come
to wrestle with him, saying in himself, "Would I had slain him
with my weapon!" Then Kanmakan took hold of him and mastering
him, shook him till the Badawi thought his bowels would burst in
his belly, and he broke out, "Hold thy hand, O boy!" He heeded
not his words, but shook him again and, lifting him from the
ground, made with him towards the stream, that he might throw him
therein: where upon the Badawi roared out, saying, "O thou
valiant man, what wilt thou do with me?" [FN#84] Quoth he, "I mean
to throw thee into this stream: it will bear thee to the Tigris. 
The Tigris will bring thee to the river Isa and the Isa will
carry thee to the Euphrates, and the Euphrates will land thee in
shine own country; so thy tribe shall see thee and know thy manly
cheer and how thy passion be sincere." Then Sabbah cried aloud
and said, "O Champion of the desert lair, do not with me what
deed the wicked dare but let me go, by the life of thy cousin,
the jewel of the fair!" Hearing this, Kanmakan set him on the
ground, but when he found him self at liberty, he ran to his
sword and targe and taking them up stood plotting in himself
treachery and sudden assault on his adversary. [FN#85]  The Prince
kenned his intent in his eye and said to him, "I con what is in
thy heart, now thou hast hold of thy sword and thy targe.  Thou
hast neither length of hand nor trick of wrestling, but thou
thinkest that, wert thou on thy mare and couldst wheel about the
plain, and ply me with thy skene, I had long ago been slain.  But
I will give thee thy requite, so there may be left in thy heart
no despite; now give me the targe and fall on me with thy
whinger; either thou shalt kill me or I shall kill thee." "Here
it is," answered Sabbah and, throwing him the targe, bared his
brand and rushed at him sword in hand; Kanmakan hent the buckler
in his right and began to fend himself with it, whilst Sabbah
struck at him, saying at each stroke, "This is the finishing
blow!" But it fell harmless enow, for Kanmakan took all on his
buckler and it was waste work, though he did not reply lacking
the wherewithal to strike and Sabbah ceased not to smite at him
with his sabre, till his arm was weary.  When his opponent saw
this, he rushed upon him and, hugging him in his arms, shook him
and threw him to the ground.  Then he turned him over on his face
and pinioned his elbows behind him with the baldrick of his
sword, and began to drag him by the feet and to make for the
river.  Thereupon cried Sabbah, "What wilt thou do with me, O
youth, and cavalier of the age and brave of the plain where
battles rage?" Answered he, "Did I not tell thee that it was my
intent to send thee by the river to thy kin and to thy tribe,
that thy heart be not troubled for them nor their hearts be
troubled for thee, and lest thou miss thy cousin's bride-feast!"
At this Sabbah shrieked aloud and wept and screaming said, "Do
not thus, O champion of the time's braves!  Let me go and make me
one of thy slaves!" And he wept and wailed and began reciting
these verses,

"I'm estranged fro' my folk and estrangement's long: *
     Shall I die amid strangers?  Ah, would that I kenned!
I die, nor my kinsman shall know where I'm slain, *
     Die in exile nor see the dear face of my friend!"

Thereupon Kanmakan had compassion on him and said, "Make with me
a covenant true and swear me an oath to be a comrade as due and
to bear me company wheresoever I may go." "'Tis well," replied
Sabbah and swore accordingly.  Then Kanmakan loosed him and he
rose and would have kissed the Prince's hand; but he forbade him
that.  Then the Badawi opened his scrip and, taking out three
barley scones, laid them before Kanmakan and they both sat down
on the bank of the stream to eat. [FN#86]  When they had done
eating together, they made the lesser ablution and prayed; after
which they sat talking of what had befallen each of them from his
people and from the shifts of Time.  Presently said Kanmakan,
"Whither dost thou now intend?" Replied Sabbah, "I purpose to
repair to Baghdad, thy native town, and abide there, until Allah
vouchsafe me the marriage portion." Rejoined the other, "Up then
and to the road!  I tarry here." So the Badawi farewelled him and
took the way for Baghdad, whilst Kanmakan remained behind, saying
to himself, "O my soul, with what face shall I return pauper-
poor?  Now by Allah, I will not go back empty handed and, if the
Almighty please, I will assuredly work my deliverance." Then he
went to the stream and made the Wuzu-washing and when prostrating
he laid his brow in the dust and prayed to the Lord, saying, "O
Allah!  Thou who sendest down the dew, and feedest the worm that
homes in the stone, I beseech Thee vouchsafe me my livelihood of
Thine Omnipotence and the Grace of Thy benevolence!" Then he
pronounced the salutation which closes prayer; yet every road
appeared closed to him.  And while he sat turning right and left,
behold, he espied a horseman making towards him with bent back
and reins slack.  He sat up right and after a time reached the
Prince; and the stranger was at the last gasp and made sure of
death, for he was grievously wounded when he came up; the tears
streamed down his cheeks like water from the mouths of skins, and
he said to Kanmakan, "O Chief of the Arabs, take me to thy
friendship as long as I live, for thou wilt not find my like; and
give me a little water though the drinking of water be harmful to
one wounded, especially whilst the blood is flowing and the life
with it.  And if I live, I will give thee what shall heal thy
penury and thy poverty: and if I die, mayst thou be blessed for
thy good intent." Now under that horseman was a stallion, so
noble a Rabite [FN#87] the tongue fails to describe him; and as
Kanmakan looked at his legs like marble shafts, he was seized
with a longing and said to himself, "Verily the like of this
stallion [FN#88] is not to be found in our time." Then he helped
the rider to alight and entreated him in friendly guise and gave
him a little water to swallow; after which he waited till he had
taken rest and addressed him, saying, "Who hath dealt thus with
thee?" Quoth the rider, "I will tell thee the truth of the case. 
I am a horse thief and I have busied myself with lifting and
snatching horses all my life, night and day, and my name is
Ghassan, the plague of every stable and stallion.  I heard tell
of this horse, that he was in the land of Roum, with King
Afridun, where they had named him Al-Katul and surnamed him Al
Majnun. [FN#89] So I journeyed to Constantinople for his sake and
watched my opportunity and whilst I was thus waiting, there came
out an old woman, one highly honoured among the Greeks, and whose
word with them is law, by name Zat al-Dawahi, a past mistress in
all manner of trickery.  She had with her this steed and ten
slaves, no more, to attend on her and the horse; and she was
bound for Baghdad and Khorasan, there to seek King Sasan and to
sue for peace and pardon from ban.  So I went out in their track,
longing to get at the horse, [FN#90] and ceased not to follow
them, but was unable to come by the stallion, because of the
strict guard kept by the slaves, till they reached this country
and I feared lest they enter the city of Baghdad.  As I was
casting about to steal the stallion lo! a great cloud of dust
arose on them and walled the horizon.  Presently it opened and
disclosed fifty horsemen, gathered together to waylay merchants
on the highway, and their captain, by name Kahrdash, was a lion
in daring and dash; a furious lion who layeth knights flat as
carpets in battle-crash."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Forty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the wounded
rider spake thus to Kanmakan, "Then came out the same Kahrdash,
and fell on the old woman and her men and bore down upon them
bashing them, nor was it long before they bound her and the ten
slaves and bore off their captives and the horse, rejoicing. 
When I saw this, I said to myself, 'My pains were in vain nor did
I attain my gain.' However, I waited to see how the affair would
fare, and when the old woman found herself in bonds, she wept and
said to the captain, Kahrdash, 'O thou doughty Champion and
furious Knight, what wilt thou do with an old woman and slaves,
now that thou hast thy will of the horse?' And she beguiled him
with soft words and she sware that she would send him horses and
cattle, till he released her and her slaves.  Then he went his
way, he and his comrades, and I followed them till they reached
this country; and I watched them, till at last I found an
opportunity of stealing the horse, whereupon I mounted him and,
drawing a whip from my wallet, struck him with it.  When the
robbers heard this, they came out on me and surrounded me on all
sides and shot arrows and cast spears at me, whilst I stuck fast
on his back and he fended me with hoofs and forehand, [FN#91] till
at last he bolted out with me from amongst them like unerring
shaft or shooting star.  But in the stress and stowre I got
sundry grievous wounds and sore; and, since that time, I have
passed on his back three days without tasting food or sleeping
aught, so that my strength is down brought and the world is
become to me as naught.  But thou hast dealt kindly with me and
hast shown ruth on me; and I see thee naked stark and sorrow hath
set on thee its mark, yet are signs of wealth and gentle breeding
manifest on thee.  So tell me, what and whence art thou and
whither art thou bound?" Answered the Prince, "My name is
Kanmakan, son of Zau al-Makan, son of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman. 
When my father died and an orphan lot was my fate, a base man
seized the throne and became King over small and great." Then he
told him all his past from first to last; and the horse thief
said to him for he pitied him, "By Allah, thou art one of high
degree and exceeding nobility, and thou shalt surely attain
estate sublime and become the first cavalier of thy time.  If
thou can lift me on horseback and mount thee behind me and bring
me to my own land, thou shalt have honour in this world and a
reward on the day of band calling to band, [FN#92] for I have no
strength left to steady myself; and if this be my last day, the
steed is thine alway, for thou art worthier of him than any
other." Quoth Kanmakan, By Allah, if I could carry thee on my
shoulders or share my days with thee, I would do this deed
without the steed!  For I am of a breed that loveth to do good
and to succour those in need; and one kindly action in Almighty
Allah's honour averteth seventy calamities from its doer.  So
make ready to set out and put thy trust in the Subtle, the All-
Wise." And he would have lifted him on to the horse and fared
forward trusting in Allah Aider of those who seek aid, but the
horse thief said, "Wait for me awhile.  Then he closed his eyes
and opening his hands, said I testify that there is no god but
the God, and I testify that Mohammed is the Apostle of God!" And
he added, "O glorious One, pardon me my mortal sin, for none can
pardon mortal sins save the Immortal!" And he made ready for
death and recited these couplets,

"I have wronged mankind, and have ranged like wind *
     O'er the world, and in wine-cups my life has past:
I've swum torrent course to bear off the horse; *
     And my guiles high places on plain have cast.
Much I've tried to win and o'er much my sin, *
     And Katul of my winnings  is most and last:
I had hoped of this steed to gain wish and need, *
     But vain was the end of this journey vast.
I have stolen through life, and my death in strife *
     Was doomed by the Lord who doth all forecast
And I've toiled these toils to their fatal end *
     For an orphan, a pauper sans kith or friend!"

And when he had finished his verses he closed his eyes and opened
his mouth; then with a single death-rattling he left this world. 
Thereupon Kanmakan rose and dug a grave and laid him in the dust;
after which he went up to the steed and kissed him and wiped his
face and joyed with exceeding joy, saying, "None hath the fellow
of this stallion; no, not even King Sasan." Such was the case
with Kanmakan; but as regards King Sasan, presently news came to
him that the Wazir Dandan had thrown off his allegiance, and with
him half the army who swore that they would have no King but
Kanmakan: and the Minister had bound the troops by a solemn
covenant and had gone with them to the Islands of India and to
Berber-land and to Black-land; [FN#93] where he had levied armies
from far and near, like unto the swollen sea for fear and none
could tell the host's van from its rear.  And the Minister was
resolved to make for Baghdad and take the kingdom in ward and
slay every soul who dare retard, having sworn not to return the
sword of war to its sheath, till he had made Kanmakan King.  When
this news came to Sasan, he was drowned in the sea of appal,
knowing that the whole state had turned against him, great and
small; and his trouble redoubled and his care became despair.  So
he opened his treasuries and distributed his monies among his
officers; and he prayed for Kanmakan's return, that he might draw
his heart to him with fair usage and bounty; and make him
commander of those troops which ceased not being faithful to him,
so might he quench the sparks ere they became a flame.  Now when
the news of this reached Kanmakan by the merchants, he returned
in haste to Baghdad on the back of the aforesaid stallion, and as
King Sasan sat perplexed upon his throne he heard of the coming
of Kanmakan; whereupon he despatched all the troops and head-men
of the city to meet him.  So all who were in Baghdad fared forth
and met the Prince and escorted him to the palace and kissed the
thresholds, whilst the damsels and the eunuchs went in to his
mother and gave her the fair tidings of his return.  She came to
him and kissed him between the eyes, but he said to her, "O
mother mine, let me go to my uncle King Sasan who hath
overwhelmed me with weal and boon." And while he so did, all the
palace-people and head-men marvelled at the beauty of the
stallion and said, "No King is like unto this man." So Kanmakan
went in to King Sasan and saluted him as he rose to receive him;
and, kissing his hands and feet, offered him the horse as a
present.  The King greeted him, saying, "Well come and welcome to
my son Kanmakan!  By Allah, the world hath been straitened on me
by reason of thine absence, but praised be Allah for thy safety!"
And Kanmakan called down blessings on him.  Then the King looked
at the stallion, Al-Katul highs, and knew him for the very horse
he had seen in such and such a year whilst beleaguering the
Cross-worshippers of Constantinople with Kanmakan's sire, Zau al-
Makan, that time they slew his uncle Sharrkan.  So he said to the
Prince, "If thy father could have come by this courser, he would
have bought it with a thousand blood horses: but now let the
honour return to the honourable.  We accept the steed and we give
him back to thee as a gift, for to him thou hast more right than
any wight, being knightliest of knights." Then King Sasan bade
bring forth for him dresses of honour and led horses and
appointed to him the chief lodging in the palace, and showed him
the utmost affection and honour, because he feared the issue of
the Wazir Dandan's doings.  At this Kanmakan rejoiced and shame
and humiliation ceased from him.  Then he went to his house and,
going to his mother, asked, "O my mother, how is it with the
daughter of my uncle?" Answered she, "By Allah, O my son, my
concern for thine absence hath distracted me from any other, even
from thy beloved; especially as she was the cause of thy
strangerhood and thy separation from me." Then he complained to
her of his case, saying, "O my mother, go to her and speak with
her; haply she will vouchsafe me her sight to see and dispel from
me this despondency." Replied his mother, "Idle desires abase
men's necks; so put away from thee this thought that can only
vex; for I will not wend to her nor go in to her with such
message.' Now when he heard his mother's words he told her what
said the horse-thief concerning Zat al-Dawahi, how the old woman
was then in their land purposing to make Baghdad, and added, "It
was she who slew my uncle and my grandfather, and needs must I
avenge them with man-bote, that our reproach be wiped out." Then
he left her and repaired to an old woman, a wicked, whorish,
pernicious beldam by name Sa'adanah and complained to her of his
case and of what he suffered for love of his cousin Kuzia Fakan
and begged her to go to her and win her favour for him.  "I hear
and I obey," answered the old hag and leaving him betook herself
to Kuzia Fakan's palace, that she might intercede with her in his
behalf.  Then she returned to him and said, "Of a truth Kuzia
Fakan saluteth thee and promiseth to visit thee this night about
midnight."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Forty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
old woman came to Kanmakan and said, "Of a truth the daughter of
thine uncle saluteth thee and she will visit thee this night
about midnight;" he rejoiced and sat down to await the fulfilment
of his cousin's promise.  But before the hour of night she came
to him, wrapped in a veil of black silk, and she went in to him
and aroused him from sleep, saying, "How canst thou pretend to
love me, when thou art sleeping heart-free and in complete
content?" So he awoke and said, "By Allah, O desire of my heart,
I slept not but in the hope that thine image might visit my
dreams!" Then she chid him with soft words and began versifying
in these couplets,

"Hadst thou been leaf in love's loyalty, *
     Ne'er haddest suffered sleep to seal those eyne:
O thou who claimest lover-loyalty, *
     Treading the lover's path of pain and pine!
By Allah, O my cousin, never yet *
     Did eyes of lover sleep such sleep indign."

Now when he heard his cousin's words, he was abashed before her
and rose and excused himself.  Then they embraced and complained
to each other of the anguish of separation; and they ceased not
thus till dawn broke and day dispersed itself over the horizon;
when she rose preparing to depart.  Upon this Kanmakan wept and
sighed and began improvising these couplets,

"O thou who deignest come at sorest sync, *
     Whose lips those teeth like necklaced pearls enshrine'
I kissed him [FN#94] thousand times and clips his waist, *
     And spent the night with cheek to cheek close li'en
Till to depart us twain came dawning day, *
     Like sword edge drawn from sheath in radiant line."

And when he ended his poetry, Kuzia Fakan took leave of him and
returned to her palace.  Now certain of her damsels became aware
of her secret, and one of these slave girls disclosed it to King
Sasan, who went into Kuzia Fakan and, drawing his sabre upon her,
would have slain her: but her mother Nuzhat al-Zaman entered and
said to him, "By Allah, do her no harm, for if thou hurt her, the
report will be noised among the folk and thou shalt become a
reproach amongst the Kings of the age!  Know thou that Kanmakan
is no son of adultery, but a man of honour and nobility, who
would not do aught that could shame him, and she was reared with
him.  So be not hasty; for verily the report is spread abroad,
among all the palace-people and all the folk of Baghdad, how the
Wazir Dandan hath levied armies from all countries and is on his
way hither to make Kanmakan King." Quoth Sasan, "By Allah, needs
must I cast him into such calamity that neither earth shall
support him nor sky shall shadow him!  I did but speak him fair
and show him favour because of my lieges and my lords, lest they
incline to him; but right soon shalt thou see what shall betide."
Then he left her and went out to order the affairs of the realm. 
Such, then, was the case with King Sasan; but as regards
Kanmakan, on the next day he came in to his mother and said, "O
my mother!  I am resolved to ride forth a raiding and a looting:
and I will cut the road of caravans and lift horses and flocks,
negroes and white slaves and, as soon as I have collected great
store and my case is bettered galore, I will demand my cousin
Kuzia Fakan in marriage of my uncle Sasan." Replied she, "O my
son, of a truth the goods of men are not ready to hand like a
scape-camel; [FN#95] for on this side of them are sword-strokes
and lance-lungings and men that eat the wild beast and lay
countries waste and chase lynxes and hunt lions." Quoth he,
Heaven forefend that I turn back from my resolve, till I have won
to my will!  Then he despatched the old woman to Kuzia Fakan, to
tell her that he was about to set out in quest of a marriage
settle ment befitting her, saying to the beldam, "Thou needs must
pray her to send me an answer." "I hear and I obey," replied the
old woman and going forth, presently returned with Kuzia Fakan's
reply, which was, "She will come to thee at midnight." So he
abode awake till one half of the night was passed, when
restlessness get hold on him, and before he was aware she came in
to him, saying, "My life be thy ransom from wakefulness!" and he
sprang up to receive her, exclaiming, "O desire of my heart, my
life be thy redemption from all ills and evils!" Then he
acquainted her, with his intent, and she wept: but he said, "Weep
not, O daughter of my uncle; for I beseech Him who decreed our
separation to vouchsafe us reunion and fair understanding." Then
Kanmakan, having fixed a day for departure, went in to his mother
and took leave of her, after which came he down from his palace
and threw the baldrick of his sword over his shoulder and donned
turband and face-veil; and mounting his horse, Al-Katul, and
looking like the moon at its full, he threaded the streets of
Baghdad, till he reached the city gate.  And behold, here he
found Sabbah bin Rammah coming out of town; and his comrade
seeing him, ran to his stirrup and saluted him.  He returned his
salutation, and Sabbah asked him, "O my brother, how camest thou
by this good steed and this sword and clothes, whilst I up to
present time have gotten nothing but my sword and target?"
Answered Kanmakan, "The hunter returneth not but with quarry
after the measure of his intention.  A little after thy
departure, fortune came to me: so now say, wilt thou go with me
and work thine intent in my company and journey with me in this
desert?" Replied Sabbah, "By the Lord of the Ka'abah, from this
time forth I will call thee naught but 'my lord'!" Then he ran on
before the horse, with his sword hanging from his neck and his
budget between his shoulder blades, and Kanmakan rode a little
behind him; and they plunged into the desert, for a space of four
days, eating of the gazelles and drinking water of the springs. 
On the fifth day they drew near a high hill, at whose foot was a
spring-encampment [FN#96] and a deep running stream; and the
knolls and hollows were filled with camels and cattle and sheep
and horses, and little children played about the pens and folds. 
When Kanmakan saw this, he rejoiced at the sight and his breast
was filled with delight; so he addressed himself to fight, that
he might take the camels and the cattle, and said to Sabbah,
"Come, fall with us upon this loot, whose owners have left it
unguarded here, and do we battle for it with near and far, so
haply may fall to our lot of goods some share." Replied Sabbah,
"O my lord, verily they to whom these herds belong be many in
number; and among them are doughty horsemen and fighting footmen;
and if we venture lives in this derring do we shall fall into
danger great and neither of us will return safe from this bate;
but we shall both be cut off by fate and leave our cousins
desolate." Then Kanmakan laughed and knew that he was a coward;
so he left him and rode down the rise, intent on rapine, with
loud cries and chanting these couplets,

"Oh a valiant race are the sons of Nu'uman, *
     Braves whose blades shred heads of the foeman-clan! [FN#97]
A tribe who, when tried in the tussle of war, *
     Taketh prowess stand in the battle-van:
In their tents safe close gaberlunzie's eyne, *
     Nor his poverty's ugly features scan:
And I for their aidance sue of Him *
     Who is King of Kings and made soul of man."

Then he rushed upon the she-camels like a he-camel in rut and
drove all before him, sheep and cattle, horses and dromedaries. 
Therewith the slaves ran at him with their blades so bright and
their lances so long; and at their head rode a Turkish horseman
who was indeed a stout champion, doughty in fray and in battle
chance and skilled to wield the nut-brown lance and the blade
with bright glance.  He drove at Kanmakan, saying, "Woe to thee! 
Knewest thou to whom these herds belong thou hadst not done this
deed.  Know that they are the goods of the band Grecian, the
champions of the ocean and the troop Circassian; and this troop
containeth none but valiant wights numbering an hundred knights,
who have cast off the allegiance of every Sultan.  But there hath
been stolen from them a noble stallion, and they have vowed not
to return hence without him." Now when Kanmakan heard these
words, he cried out, saying, "O villain, this I bestride is the
steed whereof ye speak and after which ye seek, and ye would do
battle with me for his sake' So come out against me, all of you
at once, and do you dourest for the nonce!" Then he shouted
between the ears of Al-Katul who ran at them like a Ghul;
whereupon Kanmakan let drive at the Turk [FN#98] and ran him
through the body and threw him from his horse and let out his
life; after which he turned upon a second and a third and a
fourth, and also of life bereft them.  When the slaves saw this,
they were afraid of him, and he cried out and said to them, "Ho,
sons of whores, drive out the cattle and the stud or I will dye
my spear in your blood." So they untethered the beasts and began
to drive them out; and Sabbah came down to Kanmakan with loud
voicing and hugely rejoicing; when lo! there arose a cloud of
dust and grew till it walled the view, and there appeared under
of it riders an hundred, like lions an-hungered.  Upon this
Sabbah took flight, and fled to the hill's topmost height,
leaving the assailable site, and enjoyed sight of the fight,
saying, "I am no warrior; but in sport and jest I
delight." [FN#99] Then the hundred cavaliers made towards Kanmakan
and surrounded him on all sides, and one of them accosted him,
saying, "Whither goest thou with this loot?" Quoth he, "I have
made it my prize and am carrying it away; and I forbid you from
it, or come on to the combat, for know ye that he who is before
you is a terrible lion and an honourable champion, and a sword
that cutteth wherever it turneth!" When the horseman heard these
words, he looked at Kanmakan and saw that he was a knight like a
mane-clad lion in might, whilst his face was as the full moon
rising on its fourteenth night, and velour shone from between his
eyes.  Now that horseman was the captain of the hundred horse,
and his name was Kahrdash; and when he saw in Kanmakan the
perfection of cavalarice with surpassing gifts of comeliness, his
beauty reminded him of a beautiful mistress of his whose name was
Fatin. [FN#100]  Now she was one of the fairest of women in face,
for Allah had given her charms and grace and noble qualities of
all kinds, such as tongue faileth to explain and which ravish the
hearts of men.  Moreover, the cavaliers of the tribe feared her
prowess and all the champions of that land stood in awe of her
high spirit; and she had sworn that she would not marry nor let
any possess her, except he should conquer her in combat (Kahrdash
being one of her suitors); and she said to her father, "None
shall approach me, save he be able to deal me over throw in the
field and stead of war thrust and blow.  Now when this news
reached Kahrdash, he scorned to fight with a girl, fearing
reproach; and one of his intimates said to him, "Thou art
complete in all conditions of beauty and goodliness; so if thou
contend with her, even though she be stronger than thou, thou
must needs overcome her; for when she seeth thy beauty and grace,
she will be discomfited before thee and yield thee the victory;
for verily women have a need of men e'en as thou heedest full
plain." Nevertheless Kahrdash refused and would not contend with
her, and he ceased not to abstain from her thus, till he met from
Kanmakan that which hath been set down.  Now he took the Prince
for his beloved Fatin and was afraid; albeit indeed she loved him
for what she had heard of his beauty and velour; so he went up to
him and said, "Woe to thee, [FN#101]  O Fatin!  Thou comest here
to show me thy prowess; but now alight from thy steed, that I may
talk with thee, for I have lifted these cattle and have foiled my
friends and waylaid many a brave and man of knightly race, all
for the sake of thy beauty of form and face, which are without
peer.  So marry me now, that Kings' daughters may serve thee and
thou shalt become Queen of these countries." When Kanmakan heard
these words, the fires of wrath flamed up in him and he cried
out, "Woe to thee, O Persian dog!  Leave Fatin and thy trust and
mistrust, and come to cut and thrust, for eftsoon thou shalt lie
in the dust;" and so saying, he began to wheel about him and
assail him and feel the way to prevail.  But when Kahrdash
observed him closely he knew him for a doughty knight and a
stalwart in fight; and the error of his thought became manifest
to him, whenas he saw the green down on his cheeks dispread like
myrtles springing from the heart of a rose bright-red.  And he
feared his onslaught and quoth he to those with him, "Woe to you! 
Let one of you charge down upon him and show him the keen sword
and the quivering spear; for know that when many do battle with
one man it is foul shame, even though he be a kemperly wight and
an invincible knight." Upon this, there ran at Kanmakan a
horseman like a lion in fight, mounted on a black horse with
hoofs snow-white and a star on his forehead, the bigness of a
dirham, astounding wit and sight, as he were Abjar, which was
Antar's destrier, even as saith of him the poet,

"The courser chargeth on battling foe, *
     Mixing heaven on high with the earth down low: [FN#102]
As though the Morning had blazed his brow, *
     And he rends her vitals as quid pro quo."

He rushed upon Kanmakan, and they wheeled about awhile, giving
blows and taking blows such as confound the sprite and dim the
sight; but Kanmakan was the first to smite the foe a swashing
blow, that rove through turband and iron skull cap and reached
his head, and he fell from his steed with the fall of a camel
when he rolleth over.  Then a second came out to him and offered
battle, and in like guise a third, a fourth and a fifth, and he
did with them all as he had done with the first.  Thereupon the
rest at once rushed upon him, for indeed they were roused by rage
and wild with wrath; but it was not long before he had pierced
them all with the point of his spear.  When Kahrdash saw these
feats of arms, he feared death; for he knew that the youth was
stoutest of heart and concluded that he was unique among knights
and braves; and he said to Kanmakan, "I waive my claim to thy
blood and I pardon thee the blood of my comrades: so take what
thou wilt of the cattle and wend thy ways, for thy firmness in
fight moveth my ruth and life is better for thee than death."
Replied Kanmakan, "Thou lackest not of the generosity of the
noble!  but leave this talk and run for thy life and reck not of
blame nor think to get back the booty; but take the straight path
for thine own safety." Thereupon Kahrdash waxed exceeding wroth,
and rage moved him to the cause of his death; so he said to
Kanmakan, "Woe to thee, an thou knew who I be, thou wouldst not
wield these words in the open field.  I am the lion to bash known
as Kahrdash, he who spoileth great Kings and waylayeth all
travellings and seizeth the merchants' preciousest things.  And
the steed under thee is that I am seeking; and I call upon thee
to tell me how thou camest by him and hast him in thy keeping."
Replied Kan makan, "Know thou that this steed was being carried
to my uncle King Sasan, under the escort of an ancient dame high
in rank attended by ten slaves, when thou fellest upon her and
tookest the horse from her; and I have a debt of blood against
this old woman for the sake of my grandfather King Omar bin al
Nu'uman and my uncle King Sharrkan.' "Woe to thee!" quoth
Kahrdash, "who is thy father, O thou that hast no lawful mother?"
Quoth he, "Know that I am Kanmakan, bin Zau al-Makan, son of Omar
bin al-Nu'uman." But when Kahrdash heard this address he said,
"Thy perfection cannot be denied, nor yet the union in thee of
knightly virtue and seemlihead," and he added, "Fare in peace,
for thy father showed us favour." Rejoined Kanmakan, "By Allah, I
will not deign to honour thee, O wretch I disdain, so far as to
overcome thee in battle plain!" Upon this the Badawi waxed wroth
and they drove at each other, shouting aloud, whilst their horses
pricked their ears and raised their tails. [FN#103]  And they
ceased not clashing together with such a crash that it seemed to
each as if the firmament were split in sunder, and they continued
to strive like two rams which butt, smiting and exchanging with
their spears thrust and cut.  Presently Kahrdash foined at
Kanmakan; but he evaded it and rejoined upon him and so pierced
him through the breast that the spearhead issued from his back. 
Then he collected the horses and the plunder, and he cried out to
the slaves, saying, "Up and be driving as hard as ye may!"
Hearing this, down came Sabbah and, accosting Kanmakan, said to
him, "Right well hast thou dight, O Knight of the age!  Verily I
prayed Allah for thee and the Lord heard my prayer." Then he cut
off Kahrdash's head and Kanmakan laughed and said, "Woe to thee,
O Sabbah!  I thought thee a rider fain of fight." Quoth the
Badawi, "Forget not thy slave in the division of the spoil, so
haply therewith I may marry my cousin Najmah." Answered Kanmakan,
"Thou shalt assuredly share in it, but now keep watch over the
booty and the slaves." Then he set out for his home and he ceased
not journeying night and day till he drew near Baghdad city, and
all the troops heard of Kanmakan, and saw what was his of loot
and cattle and the horse-thief's head on the point of Sabbah's
spear.  Also (for he was a noted highwayman) the merchants knew
Kahrdash's head and rejoiced, saying, "Allah hath rid mankind of
him!"; and they marvelled at his being slain and blessed his
slayer.  Thereupon all the people of Baghdad came to Kanmakan,
seeking to know what adventures had befallen him, and he told
them what had passed, whereupon all men were taken with awe of
him and the Knights and champions feared him.  Then he drove his
spoil under the palace walls; and, planting the spear heel, on
whose point was Kahrdash's head, over against the royal gate,
gave largesse to the people of Baghdad, distributing horses and
camels, so that all loved him and their hearts inclined to him. 
Presently he took Sabbah and lodged him in a spacious dwelling
and gave him a share of the loot; after which he went in to his
mother and told her all that had befallen him in his last
journey.  Meanwhile the news of him reached the King, who rose
from his levee and, shutting himself up with his chief officers,
said to them, "Know ye that I desire to reveal to you my secret
and acquaint you with the hidden facts of my case.  And further
know that Kanmakan will be the cause of our being uprooted from
this kingdom, our birth place; for he hath slain Kahrdash, albeit
he had with him the tribes of the Kurds and the Turks, and our
affair with him will end in our destruction, seeing that the most
part of our troops are his kinsmen and ye weet what the Wazir
Dandan hath done; how he disowneth me, after all I have shown him
of favours; and after being faithful he hath turned traitor. 
Indeed it hath reached me that he hath levied an army in the
provinces and hath planned to make Kanmakan Sultan, for that the
Sultanate was his father's and his grandfather's; and assuredly
he will slay me without mercy." Now when the Lords of the Realm
heard from him these words, they replied, "O King, verily this
man. [FN#104] is unequal to this, and did we not know him to have
been reared by thee, not one of us would approve of him.  And
know thou that we are at thy commandment; if thou desire his
death, we will do him die; and if thou wilt remove him, we will
remove him." Now when King Sasan heard this, he said, "Verily, to
slay him were wise; but needs must ye swear an oath to it." So
all sware to slay Kanmakan without giving him a chance; to the
end that, when the Wazir Dandan should come and hear of his
death, his force might be weakened and he fail of his design. 
When they had made this compact and covenant with trim, the king
honoured them with the highest honours and presently retired to
his own apartments.  But the officers deserted him and the troops
refused their service and would neither mount nor dismount until
they should espy what might befal, for they saw that most of the
army was with the Wazir Dandan.  Presently, the news of these
things came to Kuzia Fakan and caused her much concern; so that
she sent for the old woman who was wont to carry messages between
her and her cousin, and when she came, bade her go to him and
warn him of the plot.  Whereto he replied, "Bear my salutation to
the daughter of my uncle and say to her, 'Verily the earth is of
Allah (to whom belong Might and Majesty!), and He giveth it as
heritage to whomsoever of His servants He willeth.' How excellent
is the saying of the sayer,

'Allah holds Kingship!  Whoso seeks without Him victory *
     Shall be cast out, with soul condemned to Hell of low
     degree:
Had I or any other man a finger breadth of land, *
     The rule were changed and men a twain of partner gods would
     see.' "

Then the old woman returned to Kuzia Fakan and told her his reply
and acquainted her that he abode in the city.  Meanwhile, King
Sasan awaited his faring forth from Baghdad, that he might send
after him some who would slay him; till it befel one morning that
Kanmakan went out to course and chase, accompanied by Sabbah, who
would not leave him night or day.  He caught ten gazelles and
among them one that had tender black eyes and turned right and
left: so he let her go and Sabbah said to him, "Why didst thou
free this gazelle?" Kanmakan laughed and set the others free
also, saying, "It is only humane to release gazelles that have
young, and this one turned not from side to side, save to look
for her fawns: so I let her go and released the others in her
honour." Quoth Sabbah, "Do thou release me, that I may go to my
people." At this Kanmakan laughed and smote him with the spear
butt on the breast, and he fell to the ground squirming like a
snake.  Whilst they were thus doing, behold, they saw a dust
cloud spireing high and heard the tramp of horses; and presently
there appeared under it a plump of knights and braves.  Now the
cause of their coming was this.  Some of his followers had
acquainted King Sasan with Kanmakan's going out to the chase; so
he sent for an Emir of the Daylamites, called Jami' and twenty of
his horsemen; and gave them money and bade them slay Kanmaken. 
So when they drew near the Prince, they charged down upon him and
he met them in mid-charge and killed them all, to the last man. 
And behold, King Sasan took horse and riding out to meet his
people, found them all slain, whereat he wondered and turned
back; when lo!  the people of the city laid hands on him and
bound him straitly.  As for Kanmakan after that adventure, he
left the place behind him and rode onward with Sabbah the Badawi. 
And the while he went, lo!  he saw a youth sitting at the door of
a house on his road and saluted him.  The youth returned his
greeting and, going into the house, brought out two platters, one
full of soured milk and the other of brewis swimming in clarified
butter; and he set the platter before Kanmakan, saying "Favour us
by eating of our victual." But he refused and quoth the young man
to him, "What aileth thee, O man, that thou wilt not eat?" Quoth
Kanmakan, "I have a vow upon me." The youth asked, "What is the
cause of thy vow?", and Kanmakan answered, "Know that King Sasan
seized upon my kingdom like a tyrant and an enemy, although it
was my father's and my grand father's before me; yet he became
master of it by force after my father's death and took no count
of me, by reason of my tender years.  So I have bound myself by a
vow to eat no man's victual till I have eased my heart of my
foe." Rejoined the youth, "Rejoice, for Allah hath fulfilled thy
vow.  Know that he hath been prisoned in a certain place and
methinks he will soon die." Asked Kanmakan, "In what house is he
confined?" "Under yon high dome," answered the other.  The Prince
looked and saw the folk entering and buffeting Sasan, who was
suffering the agonies of the dying.  So he arose and went up to
the pavilion and noted what was therein; after which he returned
to his place and, sitting down to the proferred victual, ate what
sufficed him and put the rest in his wallet.  Then he took seat
in his own place and ceased not sitting till it was dark night
and the youth, whose guest he was slept; when he rose and
repaired to the pavilion wherein Sasan was confined.  Now about
it were dogs guarding it, and one of them sprang at him; so he
took out of his budget a bit of meat and threw it to him.  He
ceased not casting flesh to the dogs till he came to the pavilion
and, making his way to where King Sasan was, laid his hand upon
his head; whereupon he said in a loud voice, "Who art thou?" He
replied, "I am Kanmakan whom thou stravest to kill; but Allah
made thee fall into thine evil device.  Did it not suffice thee
to take my kingdom and the kingdom of my father, but thou must
purpose to slay me?" [FN#105]  And Sasan swore a false oath that
he had not plotted his death and that the bruit was untrue.  So
Kanmakan forgave him and said to him, "Follow me." Quoth he, "I
cannot walk a single step for weakness." Quoth Kanmakan, "If the
case be thus we will get us two horses and ride forth, I and
thou, and seek the open." So he did as he said, and he took horse
with Sasan and rode till day break, when they prayed the dawn
prayer and fared on, and ceased not faring till they came to a
garden, where they sat down and talked.  Then Kanmakan rose to
Sasan and said, "Is aught left to set thy heart against me?" "No,
by Allah!" replied Sasan.  So they agreed to return to Baghdad
and Sabbah the Badawi said, "I will go before you, to give folk
the fair tidings of your coming." Then he rode on in advance,
acquainting women and men with the good news; so all the people
came out to meet Kanmakan with tabrets and pipes; and Kuzia Fakan
also came out, like the full moon shining in all her splendour of
light through the thick darkness of the night.  So Kanmakan met
her, and soul yearned to soul and body longed for body.  There
was no talk among the people of the time but of Kanmakan; for the
Knights bore witness of him that he was the most valiant of the
folk of the age and said, "It is not right that other than
Kanmakan should be our Sultan, but the throne of his grandfather
shall revert to him as it began." Meanwhile Sasan went in to his
wife, Nuzhat al-Zaman, who said to him, "I hear that the folk
talk of nothing but Kanmakan and attribute to him such qualities
as tongue never can." He replied, "Hearing of a man is not like
seeing a man.  I have seen him, but have noted in him none of the
attributes of perfection.  Not all that is heard is said; but
folk ape one another in extolling and cherishing him, and Allah
maketh his praises to run on the lips of men, so that there
incline to him the hearts of the people of Baghdad and of the
Wazir Dandan, that perfidious and treacherous man; who hath
levied troops from all lands and taketh to himself the right of
naming a King of the country; and who chooseth that it shall be
under the hand of an orphan ruler whose worth is naught." Asked
Nuzhat al-Zaman, "What then is it that thou purposest to do?";
and the King answered, "I mean to kill him, that the Wazir may be
baulked of his intent and return to his allegiance, seeing
nothing for it but my service." Quoth she, "In good sooth perfidy
with strangers is a foul thing and how much more with kith and
kin!  The righteous deed to do would be to marry him to thy
daughter Kuzia Fakan and give heed to what was said of old time,

'An Fate some person 'stablish o'er thy head, *
     And thou being worthier her choice upbraid,
Yet do him honour due to his estate; *
     He'll bring thee weal though far or near thou vade:
Nor speak thy thought of him, else shalt thou be *
     Of those who self degrade from honour's grade:
Many Harims are lovelier than the Bride, *
     But Time and Fortune lent the Bride their aid.'"

When Sasan heard these her words and comprehended what her verse
intended, he rose from her in anger and said, "Were it not that
thy death would bring on me dishonour and disgrace, I would take
off thy head with my blade and make an end of thy breath." Quoth
she, "Why art thou wroth with me?  I did but jest with thee."
Then she rose to him and bussed his head and hands, saying,
"Right is thy foresight, and I and thou will cast about for some
means to kill him forthright." When he heard this, he was glad
and said, "Make haste and contrive some deceit to relieve me of
my grieving: for in my sooth the door of device is straitened
upon me!" Replied she, "At once I will devise for thee to do away
his life." "How so?" asked he; and she answered, "By means of our
female slave the so-called Bakun." Now this Bakun was past
mistress in all kinds of knavery and was one of the most
pestilent of old women, in whose religion to abstain from
wickedness was not lawful; she had brought up Kuzia Fakan and
Kanmakan who had her in so great affection that he used to sleep
at her feet.  So when King Sasan heard his wife name her, he
said, "Right is this recking"; and, sending for the old woman,
told her what had passed and bade her cast about to kill
Kanmaken, promising her all good.  Replied she, "Thy bidding
shall be obeyed; but I would have thee, O my lord, give me a
dagger [FN#106] which hath been tempered in water of death, that I
may despatch him the speedilier for thee." Quoth Sasan, "And
welcome to thee!"; and gave her a hanger that would devance man's
destiny.  Now this slave women had heard stories and verses and
had learned by rote great store of strange sayings and anecdotes:
so she took the dagger and went out of the room, considering how
she could compass his doom.  Then she repaired to Kanmakan, who
was sitting and awaiting news of tryst with the daughter of his
uncle, Kuzia Fakan; so that night his thought was taken up with
her and the fires of love for her raged in his heart.  And while
he was thus, behold, the slave woman, Bakun, went in to him and
said, "Union time is at hand and the days of disunion are over
and gone." Now when he heard this he asked, "How is it with Kuzia
Fakan?"; and Bakun answered, "Know that her time is wholly taken
up with love of thee." At this he rose and doffing his outer
clothes put them on her and promised her all good.  Then said
she, "Know that I mean to pass this night with thee, that I may
tell thee what talk I have heard and console thee with stories of
many passion distraughts whom love hath made sick." "Nay," quoth
he, "rather tell me a tale that will gladden my heart and gar my
cares depart." "With joy and good will," answered she; then she
took seat by his side (and that poniard under her dress) and
began to say: "Know thou that the pleasantest thing my ears ever
heard was





The Tale of the Hashish Eater.



A certain man loved fair women, and spent his substance on them,
till he became so poor that nothing remained to him; the world
was straitened upon him and he used to go about the market-
streets begging his daily bread.  Once upon a time as he went
along, behold, a bit of iron nail pierced his finger and drew
blood; so he sat down and wiping away the blood, bound up his
finger.  Then he arose crying out, and fared forwards till he
came to a Hammam and entering took off his clothes, and when he
looked about him he found it clean and empty.  So he sat him down
by the fountain-basin, and ceased not pouring water on his head,
till he was tired.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Forty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the man sat
down by the fountain basin and ceased not pouring water on his
head till he was tired.  Then he went out to the room in which
was the cistern of cold water; and seeing no one there, he found
a quiet corner and taking out a piece of Hashish, [FN#107]
swallowed it.  Presently the fumes mounted to his brain and he
rolled over on to the marble floor.  Then the Hashish made him
fancy that a great lord was shampooing him and that two slaves
stood at his head, one bearing a bowl and the other washing gear
and all the requisites of the Hammam.  When he saw this, he said
in himself, "Meseemeth these here be mistaken in me; or else they
are of the company of us Hashish-eaters." [FN#108]  Then he
stretched out his legs and he imagined that the bathman said to
him, "O my master, the time of thy going up to the Palace draweth
near and it is to-day thy turn of service." At this he laughed
and said to himself, "As Allah willeth, [FN#109] O Hashish!" Then
he sat and said nothing, whilst the bathman arose and took him by
the hand and girt his middle with a waist-cloth of black silk,
after which the two slaves followed him with the bowls and gear,
and they ceased not escorting him till they brought him into a
cabinet, wherein they set incense and perfumes a-burning.  He
found the place full of various kinds of fruits and sweet-scented
flowers, and they sliced him a watermelon and seated him on a
stool of ebony, whilst the bathman stood to wash him and the
slaves poured water on him; after which they rubbed him down well
and said, "O our lord, Sir Wazir, health to thee forever!" Then
they went out and shut the door on him; and in the vanity of
phantasy he arose and removed the waist-cloth from his middle,
and laughed till he well nigh fainted.  He gave not over laughing
for some time and at last quoth he to himself, "What aileth them
to address me as if I were a Minister and style me Master, and
Sir?  Haply they are now blundering; but after an hour they will
know me and say, This fellow is a beggar; and take their fill of
cuffing me on the neck." Presently, feeling hot he opened the
door, whereupon it seemed to him that a little white slave and an
eunuch came in to him carrying a parcel.  Then the slave opened
it and brought out three kerchiefs of silk, one of which he threw
over his head, a second over his shoulders and a third he tied
round his waist.  Moreover, the eunuch gave him a pair of bath-
clogs, [FN#110] and he put them on; after which in came white
slaves and eunuchs and sup ported him (and he laughing the while)
to the outer hall, which he found hung and spread with
magnificent furniture, such as be seemeth none but kings; and the
pages hastened up to him and seated him on the divan.  Then they
fell to kneading him till sleep overcame him; and he dreamt that
he had a girl in his arms.  So he kissed her and set her between
his thighs; then, sitting to her as a man sitteth to a
woman, [FN#111] he took yard in hand and drew her towards him and
weighed down upon her, when lo!  he heard one saying to him,
"Awake, thou ne'er-do-well!  The noon hour is come and thou art
still asleep." He opened his eyes and found him self lying on the
merge of the cold-water tank, amongst a crowd of people all
laughing at him; for his prickle was at point and the napkin had
slipped from his middle.  So he knew that all this was but a
confusion of dreams and an illusion of Hashish and he was vexed
and said to him who had aroused him, "Would thou hadst waited
till I had put it in!" Then said the folk, "Art thou not ashamed,
O Hashish-eater, to be sleeping stark naked with stiff standing
tool?" And they cuffed him till his neck was red.  Now he was
starving, yet forsooth had he savoured the flavour of pleasure in
his dream.  When Kanmakan heard the bondwoman's tale, he laughed
till he fell backward and said to Bakun, "O my nurse, this is
indeed a rare story and a delectable; I never heard the like of
this anecdote.  Say me!  hast more?" "Yes," replied she, and she
ceased not to tell him merry adventures and laughable
absurdities, till sleep overcame him.  Then she sat by his head
till the most part of the night was past, when she said to
herself, "It is time to profit by the occasion." So she sprang to
her feet and unsheathed the hanger and rushing up to Kanmakan,
was about to cut his throat when behold, his mother came in upon
the twain.  As soon as Bakun saw her, she rose in respect and
advanced to meet her, and fear get hold of her and she fell a-
trembling, as if he had the ague.  When his mother looked at her
she marvelled to see her thus and aroused her son, who awoke and
found her sitting at his head.  Now the cause of her coming was
that Kuzia Fakan overheard the conversation and the concert to
kill Kanmakan, and she said to his mother, "O wife of my uncle,
go to thy son, ere that wicked whore Bakun murther him;" and she
told her what had passed from first to last.  So she fared forth
at once, and she thought of naught and stayed not for aught till
she went in to her son at the very moment when Bakun was about to
slay him in his sleep.  When he awoke, he said to his mother, "O
my mother, indeed thou comest at a good time, for nurse Bakun
hath been with me this night." Then he turned to Bakun and asked
her, "By my life!  knowest thou any story better than those thou
hast told me?" She answered, "And where is what I have told thee
compared with what I will tell thee?; but however better it be,
it must be told at another time." Then she rose to depart, hardly
believing, in her escape albeit he said, "Go in peace!" for she
perceived by her cunning that his mother knew what had occurred. 
So she went her way; whereupon his mother said to him, "O my son,
blessed be this night, for that Almighty Allah hath delivered
thee from this accursed woman." "And how so?" enquired he, and
she told him the story from beginning to end.  Quoth he, "O my
mother, of a truth the live man findeth no slayer, and though
slain he shall not die; but now it were wiser that we depart from
amongst these enemies and let Allah work what He will." So, when
day dawned he left the city and joined the Wazir Dandan, and
after his departure, certain things befel between King Sasan and
Nuzhat al-Zaman, which compelled her also to quit the city and
join herself to them; and presently they were met by all the high
officers of King Sasan who inclined to their party.  Then they
sat in counsel together devising what they should do, and at last
all agreed upon a razzia into the land of Roum there to take
their revenge for the death of King Omar bin al-Nu'uman and his
son Sharrkan.  So they set out with this in tent and, after
sundry adventures (which it were tedious to tell as will appear
from what follows), they fell into the hands of Rumzan, King of
the Greeks.  Next morning, King Rumzan caused Kanmakan and the
Wazir Dandan and their company to be brought before him and, when
they came, he seated them at his side, and bade spread the tables
of food.  So they ate and drank and took heart of grace, after
having made sure of death, when they were summoned to the King's
presence; and they had said to one another, "He hath not sent for
us but to slay us." And when they were comforted the King said,
"In truth I have had a dream, which I related to the monks, and
they said, "None can expound it to thee save the Wazir Dandan."
Quoth the Minister, "Weal it was thou didst see in thy dream, O
King of the age!" Quoth the King, "O Wazir, I dreamt that I was
in a pit which seemed a black well where multitudes were
tormenting me; and I would have risen, but when springing up I
fell on my feet and could not get out of that same pit.  Then I
turned and saw therein a girdle of gold and I stretched out my
hand to take it; but when I raised it from the ground, I saw it
was two girdles.  So I girt my middle with them both and behold,
the girdles became one girdle; and this, O Wazir, is my dream and
what I saw when my sleep was deepest." Said Dandan, "O our Lord
the Sultan!  know that this thy dream denoteth thou hast a
brother or a brother's son or an uncle's son or other near
kinsman of thy flesh and blood whom thou knowest not; withal he
is of the noblest of you all." Now when the King heard these
words he looked at Kanmakan and Nuzhat al-Zaman and Kuzia Fakan
and the Wazir Dandan and the rest of the captives and said to
himself, "If I smite these people's necks, their troops will lose
heart for the destruction of their chiefs and I shall be able to
return speedily to my realm, lest the Kingship pass out of my
hands." So having determined upon this he called the Sworder and
bade him strike off Kanmakan's head upon the spot and forthright,
when lo!  up came Rumzan's nurse and said to him, "O auspicious
King, what purposest thou?" Quoth he, "I purpose slaughtering
these prisoners who are in my power; and after that I will throw
their heads among their men: then will I fall upon them, I and
all my army in one body, and kill all we can kill and rout the
rest: so will this be the decisive action of the war and I shall
return speedily to my kingdom ere aught of accident befal among
my subjects." When the nurse heard these words, she came up to
him and said in the Frankish tongue, "How canst thou prevail upon
thyself to slay thine own brother's son, and thy sister, and thy
sister's daughter?" When he heard this language, he was wroth
with exceeding wrath and said to her, "O accursed woman, didst
thou not tell me that my mother was murthered and that my father
died by poison?  Didst thou not give me a jewel and say to me,
'Of a truth this jewel was thy father's?' Why didst thou not tell
me the truth?" Replied she, "All that I told thee is true, but my
case and thy case are wonderful and my history and thy his tory
are marvellous.  My name is Marjanah and thy mother's name was
Abrizah: and she was gifted with such beauty and loveliness and
velour that proverbs were made of her, and her prowess was
renowned among men of war.  And thy father was King Omar bin al-
Nu'uman, Lord of Baghdad and Khorasan, without doubt or double
dealing or denial.  He sent his son Sharrkan on a razzia in
company with this very Wazir Dandan; and they did all that men
can.  But Sharrkan, thy brother, who had preceded the force,
separated himself from the troops and fell in with thy mother
Queen Abrizah in her palace; and we happened to have sought a
place apart in order to wrestle, she and I and her other damsels. 
He came upon us by chance while we were in such case, and
wrestled with thy mother, who overcame him by the power of her
splendid beauty and by her prowess.  Then she entertained him
five days in her palace, till the news of this came to her
father, by the old woman Shawahi, surnamed Zat al-Dawahi,
whereupon she embraced Al-Islam at the hands of Sharrkan, and he
took her and carried her by stealth to Baghdad, and with her
myself and Rayhanab and twenty other damsels, all of us having,
like her, followed the True Faith.  When we came into the
presence of thy Father, the King Omar bin al-Nu'uman, and he saw
thy mother, Queen Abrizah, he fell in love with her and going in
unto her one night, had connection with her, and she conceived by
him and became with child of thee.  Now thy mother had three
jewels which she presented to thy father; and he gave one of them
to his daughter, Nuzhat al-Zaman, another to thy brother, Zau al-
Makan, and the third to thy brother Sharrkan.  This last thy
mother took from Sharrkan and kept it for thee.  But as the time
of her delivery drew near she yearned after her own people and
disclosed to me her secret; so I went to a black slave called Al-
Ghazban; and, privily telling him our case, bribed him to go with
us.  Accordingly the negro took us and fled the city with us, thy
mother being near her time.  But as we approached a desert place
on the borders of our own country, the pangs of labour came upon
thy mother.  Then the slave proved himself a lustful villain and
approaching her sought of her a shameful thing; whereupon she
cried out at him with a loud cry, and was sore affrighted at him. 
In the excess of her fright she gave birth to thee at once, and
at that moment there arose, in the direction of our country, a
dust-cloud which towered and flew till it walled the view. 
Thereupon the slave feared for his life; so he smote Queen
Abrizah with his sword and slew her in his fury; then mounting
his horse he went his way.  Soon after his going, the dust lifted
and discovered thy grandfather, King Hardub, Lord of Graecia-
land, who, seeing thy mother (and his daughter) lying slain on
the plain, was sorely troubled with a distress that redoubled,
and questioned me of the manner of her death and the cause of her
secretly quitting her father's realm.  So I told him all that had
passed, first and last; and this is the cause of the feud between
the people of the land of the Greeks and the people of the city
of Baghdad.  Then we bore off thy murthered mother and buried
her; and I took thee and reared thee, and hung about thy neck the
jewel which was with Queen Abrizah.  But, when being grown up
thou camest to man's estate, I dared not acquaint thee with the
truth of the matter, lest such information stir up a war of blood
revenge between you.  More over, thy grandfather had enjoined me
to secrecy, and I could not gainsay the commandment of thy
mother's father, Hardub, King of the Greeks.  This, then, is the
cause of my concealment and the reason why I forbore to inform
thee that thy father was King Omar bin al-Nu'uman; but when thou
camest to the throne, I told thee what thou knowest; and I durst
not reveal to thee the rest till this moment, O King of the Age! 
So now I have discovered to thee my secret and my proof, and I
have acquainted thee with all I know; and thou reckest best what
is in thy mind." Now all the captives had heard the slave woman
Marjanah, nurse to King Rumzan, speaking as she spake; when
Nuzhat al-Zaman, without stay or delay, cried out, saying, "This
King Rumzan is my brother by my father, King Omar bin al-Nu'uman,
and his mother was Queen Abrizah, daughter of King Hardub, Lord
of the Greeks; and I know this slave-woman Marjanah right well."
With this, trouble and perplexity got hold upon Rumzan and he
caused Nuzhat al-Zaman to be brought up to him forthright.  When
he looked upon her, blood yearned to blood and he questioned her
of his history.  She told him the tale and her story tallied with
that of Marjanah, his nurse; whereupon the King was assured that
he was, indeed and without a doubt, of the people of Irak; and
that King Omar bin al-Nu'uman was his father.  So without losing
time he caused his sister to be unpinioned, and Nuzhat al-Zaman
came up to him and kissed his hands, whilst her eves ran over
with tears.  The King west also to see her weeping, and brotherly
love possessed him and his heart yearned to his brother's son
Sultan Kanmakan.  So he sprang to his feet and, taking the sword
from the Sworder's hands (whereat the captives made sure of
death), he caused them to be set close to him and he cut their
bonds with the blade and said to his nurse Marjanah, "Explain the
matter to this company, even as thou hast explained it to me."
Replied she, "O King, know that this Shayth is the Wazir Dandan
and he is the best of witnesses to my story, seeing that he
knoweth the facts of the case." Then she turned to the captives
and repeated the whole story to them on the spot and forthright,
and in presence of the Kings of the Greeks and the Kings of the
Franks; whereupon Queen Nuzhat al-Zaman and the Wazir Dandan and
all who were prisoners with them confirmed her words.  When
Marjanah, the bond-woman, had finished, chancing to look at
Sultan Kanmakan she saw on his neck the third jewel, fellow to
the two which were with Queen Abrizah; and, recognising it, she
cried so loud a cry, that the palace re-echoed it and said to the
King, "O my son, know that now my certainty is still more
assured, for this jewel that is about the neck of yonder captive
is the fellow to that I hung to thy neck; and, these being the
two, this captive is indeed thy brother's son, Kanmakan." Then
the slave women Marjanah turned to Kanmakan and said to him, "Let
me see that jewel, O King of the Age!"; so he took it from his
neck and handed it to her.  Then she asked Nuzhat al-Zaman of the
third jewel and she gave it to her; and when the two were in her
hand she delivered them to King Rumzan, and the truth and proof
were made manifest to him; and he was assured that he was indeed
Sultan Kanmakan's uncle and that his father was King Omar bin al-
Nu'uman.  So he rose at once and on the spot and, going up to the
Wazir Dandan, threw his arms round his neck; then he embraced
King Kanmakan and the twain cried a loud cry for excess of joy. 
The glad news was blazed abroad without delay; and they beat the
tabrets and cymbals, whilst the shawms sounded and the people
held high festival.  The armies of Irak and Syria heard the
clamour of rejoicing among the Greeks; so they mounted to the
last man, and King Zibl Khan also took horse saying to himself,
"Would I knew what can be the cause of this clamour and rejoicing
in the army of the Franks and the Greeks!" Then the army of Irak
dight itself for fight and advanced into the plain and place of
cut and foin.  Presently, King Rumzan turned him round and saw
the army deployed and in preparing for battle employed, so he
asked the cause thereof and was told the state of the case. 
Thereupon he bade his niece and brother's daughter, Kuzia Fakan,
return at once and forthright to the troops of Syria and Irak and
acquaint them with the plight that had betided and how it was
come to light that King Rumzan was uncle to Sultan Kanmakan.  She
set out, putting away from her sorrows and troubles and, coming
to King Zibl Khan, [FN#112] saluted him and told him all that had
passed of the good accord, and how King Rumzan had proved to be
her uncle and uncle of Kanmakan.  And when she went in to him she
found him tearful eyed, in fear for the captive Emirs and
Princes; but when he heard what had passed, from first to last,
the Moslem's sadness was abated and they joyed with the more
gladness.  Then King Zibl Khan and all his officers and his
retinue took horse and followed Princess Kuzia Fakan till they
reached the pavilion of King Rumzan; and when entering they found
him sitting with his nephew, Sultan Kanmakan.  Now he had taken
counsel with the Wazir Dandan concerning King Zibl Khan and had
agreed to commit to his charge the city of Damascus of Sham and
leave him King over it as he before had been while they
themselves entered Irak.  Accordingly, they confirmed him in the
vice royalty of Damascus of Syria, and bade him set out at once
for his government; so he fared forth with his troops and they
rode with him a part of the way to bid him farewell.  Then they
returned to their own places whereupon, the two armies
foregathered and gave orders for the march upon Irak; but the
Kings said one to other, "Our hearts will never be at rest nor
our wrath cease to rage till we have taken our wreak of the old
woman Shawahi, surnamed Zat al-Dawahi, and wiped away our shame
and blot upon our honour." Thereupon King Rumzan and his nephew
set out, surrounded by their Nobles and Grandees; and indeed
Kanmakan rejoiced in his uncle, King Rumzan, and called down
blessings on nurse Marjanah who had made them known to each
other.  They fared on and ceased not faring till they drew near
their home Baghdad, and when the Chief Chamberlain, Sasan, heard
of their approach, he came out to meet them and kissed the hand
of King Rumzan who bestowed on him a dress of honour.  Then the
King of Roum sat down on the throne and seated by his side his
nephew Sultan Kanmakan, who said to him, "O my uncle, this
Kingdom befitteth none but thee." Replied Rumzan, "Allah be my
refuge and the Lord forbid that I should supplant thee in thy
Kingdom!" Upon this the Wazir Dandan counselled them to share the
throne between the two, ruling each one day in turn; and with
this they were well satisfied.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Forty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the two
Kings agreed each to rule one day in turn: then made they feasts
and offered sacrifices of clean beasts and held high festival;
and they abode thus awhile, whilst Sultan Kanmakan spent his
nights with his cousin Kuzia Fakan.  And after that period, as
the two Kings sat rejoicing in their condition and in the happy
ending of their troubles, behold, they saw a cloud of dust arise
and tower till it walled the world from their eyes.  And out of
it came a merchant shrieking and crying aloud for succour and
saying, "O Kings of the Age!  how cometh it that I woned safely
in the land of the Infidels and I am plundered in your realm,
though it be the biding place of justice [FN#113] and peace?" Then
King Rumzan went up to him and questioned him of his case and he
replied, "I am a merchant and, like other merchants, I have been
long absent from my native land, travelling in far countries for
some twenty years; and I have a patent of exemption from the city
of Damascus which the Viceroy, King Sharrkan (who hath found
mercy) wrote me, for the cause that I had made him gift of a
slave-girl.  Now as I was drawing near my home, having with me an
hundred loads of rarities of Hind, when I brought them near
Baghdad, which be the seat of your sovereignty and the place of
your peace and your justice, out there came upon me wild Arabs
and Kurds [FN#114] in band gathered together from every land; and
they slew my many and they robbed my money and this is what they
have done me." Then the trader wept in presence of King Rumzan,
saying that he was an old man and infirm; and he bemoaned himself
till the King felt for him and had compassion on him; and
likewise did King Kanmakan and they swore that they would sally
forth upon the thieves.  So they set out amid an hundred horse,
each reckoned worth thou sands of men, and the merchant went
before them to guide them in the right way; and they ceased not
faring on all that day and the livelong night till dawnbreak,
when they came to a valley abounding in rills and shady with
trees.  Here they found the foray dispersed about the valley,
having divided that merchant's bales among them; but there was
yet some of the goods left.  So the hundred horsemen fell upon
them and surrounded them on all sides, and King Rumzan shouted
his war cry, and thus also did his nephew Kanmakan, and ere long
they made prize of them all, to the number of near three hundred
horsemen, banded together of the refuse of rascality. [FN#115] 
They took what they could find of the merchant's goods and,
binding them tightly, brought them to Baghdad, where King Rumzan
and his nephew, King Kanmakan, sat down together on one throne
and, passing the prisoners in review before them, questioned them
of their case and their chiefs.  They said, "We have no chiefs
but these three men and it was they who gathered us together from
all corners and countries." The Kings said to them, "Point out to
us your headmen!"; and, when this was done, they bade lay hands
on the leaders and set their comrades free, after taking from
them all the goods in their possession and restoring them to the
merchant, who examined his stuffs and monies and found that a
fourth of his stock was missing.  The Kings engaged to make good
the whole of his loss, where upon the trader pulled out two
letters, one in the handwriting of Sharrkan, and the other in
that of Nuzhat al-Zaman; for this was the very merchant who had
bought Nuzhat al-Zaman of the Badawi, when she was a virgin, and
had forwarded her to her brother Sharrkan; and that happened
between them which happened. [FN#116]  Hereupon King Kanmakan
examined the letters and recognised the handwriting of his uncle
Sharrkan, and, having heard the history of his aunt, Nuzhat al-
Zaman, he went in to her with the second letter written by her to
the merchant who had lost through her his monies; Kanmakan also
told her what had befallen the trader from first to last.  She
knew her own handwriting and, recognising the merchant,
despatched to him guest gifts and commended him to her brother
and nephew, who ordered him largesse of money and black slaves
and pages to wait on him; besides which Nuzhat al-Zaman sent him
an hundred thousand dirhams in cash and fifty loads of
merchandise and presented to him other rich presents.  Then she
sent for him and when he came, she went up to him and saluted him
and told him that she was the daughter of King Omar bin al-
Nu'uman and that her brother was King Rumzan and that King
Kanmakan was her nephew.  Thereupon the merchant rejoiced with
great joy, and congratulated her on her safety and on her re-
union with her brother, and kissed her hands thanking her for her
bounty, and said to her, "By Allah!  a good deed is not lost upon
thee!" Then she withdrew to her own apartment and the trader
sojourned with them three days, after which he took leave of them
and set out on his return march to the land of Syria.  Thereupon
the two Kings sent for the three robber chiefs who were of the
highway men, and questioned them of their case, when one of them
came forward and said, "Know ye that I am a Badawi who am wont to
lie in wait, by the way, to snatch small children [FN#117] and
virgin girls and sell them to merchants; and this I did for many
a year until these latter days, when Satan incited me to join yon
two gallows birds in gathering together all the riff-raff of the
Arabs and other peoples, that we might plunder merchandise and
waylay merchants." Said the Kings, "Tell us the rarest of the
adventures that have befallen thee in kidnapping children and
maidens." Replied he, "O Kings of the Age, the strangest thing
that happened to me was that one day, two-and-twenty years ago, I
snatched a girl who belonged to the Holy City; she was gifted
with beauty and comeliness, despite that she was but a servant
and was clad in threadbare clothes, with a piece of camlet-cloth
on her head.  So I entrapped her by guile as she came out of the
caravanserai; and at that very hour mounting her on a camel, made
off with her, thinking to carry her to my own people in the
Desert and there set her to pasture the camels and gather their
droppings in the valley.  But she wept with so sore a weeping
that after coming down upon her with blows, I took her and
carried her to Damascus city where a merchant saw her with me
and, being astounded at her beauty and marvelling at her
accomplishments, wished to buy her of me and kept on bidding me
more and more for her, till at last I sold her to him for an
hundred thousand dirhams.  After selling her I heard her display
prodigious eloquence; and it reached me that the merchant clothed
her in handsome gear and presented her to the Viceroy of
Damascus, who gave him three times the price which he had paid to
me, and this price, by my life!  was but little for such a
damsel.  This, O Kings of the Age, is the strangest thing that
ever befel me." When the two Kings heard her story they wondered
thereat, but when Nuzhat al-Zaman heard what the Badawi related,
the light became darkness before her face and she cried out and
said to her brother Rumzan, "Sure and sans doubt this is the very
Badawi who kidnapped me in the Holy City Jerusalem!" Then she
told them all that she had endured from him in her stranger hood
of hardship, blows, hunger, humiliation, contempt, adding, "And
now it is lawful for me to slay him." So saying she seized a
sword and made at him to smite him; and behold, he cried out and
said, "O Kings of the Age, suffer her not to slay me, till I
shall have told you the rare adventures that have betided me."
And her nephew Kanmakan said to her, "O my aunt, let him tell us
his tale, and after that do with him as thou wilt." So she held
her hand and the Kings said to him, "Now let us hear thy
history." Quoth he, "O Kings of the Age, if I tell you a rare
tale will ye pardon me?" "Yes," answered they.  Then the Badawi
robber-chief began,




The Tale of Hammad the Badawi.



And he said:--Know ye that a short while ago, I was sore wakeful
one night and thought the morn would never dawn; so, as soon as
it was break of day I rose, without stay or delay; and, slinging
over my shoulder my sword, mounted horse and set my lance in
rest.  Then I rode out to sport and hunt and, as I went along, a
company of men accosted me and asked me whither I was bound I
told them and they said, "We will keep thee company." So we all
fared on together, and, whilst we were faring, lo and behold!  up
started an ostrich and we gave her chase, but she escaped our
pursuit and spreading wings ceased not to fly before us (and we
following by sight) till she lost us in a desert wherein there
was neither grass nor water, nor heard we aught therein save hiss
of snake and wail of Jinn and howl of Ghul; and when we reached
that place the ostrich disappeared nor could we tell whether she
had flown up into the sky or into the ground had gone down.  Then
we turned our horses' heads and thought to return; but found that
to retrace our steps at that time of burning heat would be
toilsome and dangerous; for the sultry air was grievous to us, so
that we thirsted with sore thirst and our steeds stood still.  We
made sure of death; but while we were in this case we suddenly
espied from afar a spacious mead where gazelles were frisking
Therein was a tent pitched and by the tent side a horse tethered
and a spear was planted with head glittering in the sun. [FN#118] 
Upon this our hearts revived after we had despaired, and we
turned our horses' heads towards that tent making for the meadow
and the water which irrigated it; and all my comrades fared for
it and I at their head, and we ceased not faring till we reached
the mead.  Then we alighted at the spring and watered our beasts. 
But I was seized with a fever of foolish curiosity and went up to
the door of that tent, wherein I saw a young man, without hair on
his cheeks, who fellowed the new moon; and on his right hand was
a slender-waisted maid, as she were a willow-wand.  No sooner did
I set eyes on her than love get hold upon my heart and I saluted
the youth, who returned my greeting.  Then said I, "O my brother,
tell me who thou art and what to thee is this damsel sitting by
thy side?" [FN#119]  Thereupon the youth bent his head groundwards
awhile, then raised it and replied, "Tell me first who thou art
and what are these horsemen with thee?" Answered I, "I am Hammad
son of al-Fazari, the renowned knight, who is reckoned among the
Arabs as five hundred horse.  We went forth from our place this
morning to sport and chase and were overcome by thirst; so I came
to the door of this tent, thinking haply to get of thee a draught
of water." When he heard these my words, he turned to the fair
maiden and said, "Bring this man water and what food there is
ready." So she arose trailing her skirts, whilst the golden
bangles tinkled on her ankles and her feet stumbled in her long
locks, and she disappeared for a little while.  Presently she
returned bearing in her right hand a silver vessel full of cold
water and in her left hand a bowl brimming with milk and dates,
together with some flesh of wild cattle.  But I could take of her
nor meat nor drink for the excess of my passion, and I applied to
her these two couplets, saying,

"It was as though the sable dye [FN#120] upon her palms, *
     Were raven perching on a swathe of freshest snow;
Thou seest Sun and Moon conjoined in her face, *
     While Sun fear-dimmed and Moon fright-pallid show."

After I had eaten and drunk I said to the youth, "Know thou, O
Chief of the Arabs, that I have told thee in all truth who and
what I am, and now I would fain have thee do the like by me and
tell me the truth of thy case." Replied the young man, "As for
this damsel she is my sister." Quoth I, "It is my desire that
thou give me her to wife of thy free will: else will I slay thee
and take her by force." Upon this, he bowed his head groundwards
awhile, then he raised his eyes to me and answered, "Thou sayest
sooth in avouching thyself a renowned knight and famed in fight
and verily thou art the lion of the desert; but if ye all attack
me treacherously and slay me in your wrath and take my sister by
force, it will be a stain upon your honour.  An you be, as ye
aver, cavaliers who are counted among the Champions and reck not
the shock of foray and fray, give me a little time to don my
armour and sling on my sword and set lance in rest and mount war
steed.  Then will we go forth into the field of fight, I and you;
and, if I conquer you, I will kill you to the last man; but if
you overcome me and slay me, this damsel, my sister, is yours."
Hearing such words I replied, "This is only just, and we oppose
it not." Then I turned back my horse's head (for my love for the
damsel waxed hotter and hotter) and returned to my companions, to
whom I set forth her beauty and loveliness as also the comeliness
of the young man who was with her, together with his velour and
strength of soul and how he had avouched himself a match for a
thousand horse.  Moreover, I described to my company the tent and
all the riches and rarities therein and said to them, "Know ye
that this youth would not have cut himself off from society and
have taken up his abode alone in this place, were he not a man of
great prowess: so I propose that whoso slayeth the younker shall
take his sister." And they said, "This contenteth us." Then my
company armed themselves and mounting, rode to the tent, where we
found that the young man had donned his gear and backed his
steed; but his sister ran up to him (her veil being drenched with
tears), and took hold of his stirrup and cried out, saying,
"Alas!" and, "Woe worth the day!" in her fear for her brother,
and recited these couplets,

"To Allah will I make my moan of travail and of woe, *
     Maybe Ilah of Arsh [FN#121] will smite their faces with
     affright:
Fain would they slay thee, brother mine, with purpose
     felon-fell; * Albe no cause of vengeance was, nor fault
     forewent the fight.
Yet for a rider art thou known to those who back the steed, *
     And twixt the East and West of knights thou art the prowess
     knight:
Thy sister's honour thou shalt guard though little might be
     hers, * For thou'rt her brother and for thee she sueth
     Allah's might:
Then let not enemy possess my soul nor 'thrall my frame, *
     And work on me their will and treat thy sister with
     despight.
I'll ne'er abide, by Allah's truth, in any land or home *
     Where thou art not, though dight it be with joyance and
     delight
For love and yearning after thee myself I fain will slay, *
     And in the gloomy darksome tomb spread bed upon the clay."

But when her brother heard her verse he wept with sore weeping
and turned his horse's head towards his sister and made this
answer to her poetry,

"Stand by and see the derring-do which I to-day will show, *
     When meet we and I deal them blows that rend and cleave and
     split;
E'en though rush out to seek a bout the lion of the war, *
     The stoutest hearted brave of all and eke the best in wit;
To him I'll deal without delay a Sa'alabiyan blow, [FN#122] *
     And dye my cane-spear's joint in blood by wound of foe
     bespit:
If all I beat not off from thee, O sister, may this frame *
     Be slain, and cast my corpse to birds, for so it would
     befit:
Yes, for thy dearest sake I'll strike my blows with might and
     main, * And when we're gone shall this event in many a book
     be writ."

And when he had ended his verse, he said, "O my sister, give ear
to what I shall enjoin on thee"; whereto she replied, "Hearkening
and obedience." Quoth he, "If I fall, let none possess thy
person;" and thereupon she buffeted her face and said, "Allah
forbid, O my brother, that I should see thee laid low and yield
myself to thy foe!" With this the youth put out his hand to her
and withdrew her veil from her face, whereupon it shone forth as
the sun shineth out from the white clouds.  Then he kissed her
between the eyes and bade her farewell; after which he turned to
us and said, "Holla, Knights!  Come ye as guests or crave ye cuts
and thrusts?  If ye come to us as your hosts, rejoice ye in the
guest rite; and, if ye covet the shining moon, come ye out
against me, knight by knight, into this plain and place of
fight." There upon rushed out to him a doughty rider and the
young man said to him, "Tell me thy name and thy father's name,
for I am under an oath not to slay any whose name tallies with
mine and whose father's name is that of my father; and if this be
the case with thee, I will give thee up the maid." Quoth the
horseman, "My name is Bilal;" [FN#123] and the young man answered
him, saying,

"Thou liest when speaking of 'benefits,' while *
     Thou comest to front with shine evillest will
An of prowess thou'rt prow, to my words give ear, *
     I'm he who make' champions in battle-field reel
With keen blade, like the horn of the cusped moon, *
     So 'ware thrust the, shall drill through the duress hill!"

Then they charged down, each at each, and the youth thrust his
adversary in the breast so that the lance head issued from his
back.  With tints, another came out, and the youth cried,

"Ho thou hound, who art rotten with foulness in grain, [FN#124] *
     What high meed is there easy for warrior to gain?
'Tis none save the lion of strain purest pure *
     Who uncareth for life in the battle plain!"

Nor was it long before the youth left him drowned in his blood
and cried out, "Who will come forth to me?" So a third horse man
rushed out upon the youth and began saying,

"To thee come I forth with my heart a-flame, *
     And summon my friends and my comrades by name:
When thou slewest the chief of the Arabs this day, *
     This day thou remainest the pledge of my claim."

Now when the youth heard this he answered him in these words,

"Thou liest, O foulest of Satans that are, *
     And with easings calumnious thou comest to war
This day thou shalt fall by a death dealing point *
     Where the lances lunge and the scymitars jar!"

Then he so foined him in the breast that the spear-point issued
from his back and he cried out, saying, "Ho!  will none come out? 
So a fourth fared forwards and the youth asked him his name and
he answered, "My name is Hilal, the New Moon." And the youth
began repeating,

"Thou hast failed who would sink me in ruin sea, *
     Thou who camest in malice with perfidy:
I, whose verses hast heard from the mouth of me, *
     Will ravish thy soul though unknown to thee."

Then they drave at each other and delivered two cuts, but the
youth's stroke devanced that of the rider his adversary and slew
him: and thus he went on to kill all who sallied out against him. 
Now when I saw my comrades slain, I said to myself, "If I go down
to fight with him, I shall not be able to prevail against him;
and, if I flee, I shall become a byword of shame among the
Arabs." But the youth gave me no time to think, for he ran at me
and dragged me from my saddle and hurled me to the ground.  I
fainted at the fall and he raised his sword designing to cut off
my head; but I clung to his skirts, and he lifted me in his hand
as though I were a sparrow.  When the maiden saw this, she
rejoiced in her brother's prowess and coming up to him, kissed
him between the eyes.  Then he delivered me to her, saying, "Take
him and look to him and entreat him hospitably, for he is come
under our rule." So she took hold of the collar of my
hauberk [FN#125] and led me away by it as one would lead a dog. 
Then she did off her brother's coat of mail and clad him in a
robe, and set for him a stool of ivory, on which he sat down; and
she said to him, "Allah whiten thy honour and prevent from thee
the shifts of fortune!" And he answered her with these couplets,

"My sister said, as saw she how I stood *
     In fight, when sun-rays lit my knightlihood
'Allah assain thee for a Brave of braves *
     To whom in vale bow lions howso wood!'
Quoth I, 'Go ask the champions of my case, *
     When feared the Lords of war my warrior mood!
My name is famed for fortune and for force, *
     And soared my spirit to such altitude,'
Ho thou, Hammad, a lion hast upstirred, *
     Shall show thee speedy death like viper brood."

Now when I heard his verse, I was perplexed as to my case and
considering my condition and how I was become a captive, I was
lowered in my own esteem.  Then I looked at the damsel, his
sister, and seeing her beauty I said to myself, "'Tis she who
caused all this trouble"; and I fell a-marvelling at her
loveliness till the tears streamed from my eyes and I recited
these couplets,

"Dear friend!  ah leave thy loud reproach and blame; *
     Such blame but irks me yet may not alarm:
I'm clean distraught for one whom saw I not *
     Without her winning me by winsome charm
Yestreen her brother crossed me in her love, *
     A Brave stout-hearted and right long of arm."

Then the maiden set food before her brother and he bade me eat
with him, whereat I rejoiced and felt assured that I should not
be slain.  And when he had ended eating, she brought him a flagon
of pure wine and he applied him to it till the fumes of the drink
mounted to his head and his face flushed red.  Then he turned to
me and said, "Woe to thee, O Hammad!  dost thou know me or not?"
Replied I, "By thy life, I am rich in naught save ignorance!'
Quoth he, "O Hammad, I am 'Abbad bin Tamim bin Sa'labah and
indeed Allah giveth thee thy liberty and leadeth thee to a happy
bride and spareth thee confusion." Then he drank to my long life
and gave me a cup of wine and I drank it off; and presently he
filled me a second and a third and a fourth, and I drained them
all; while he made merry with me and swore me never to betray
him.  So I sware to him one thousand five hundred oaths that I
would never deal perfidiously with him at any time, but that I
would be a friend and a helper to him.  Thereupon he bade his
sister bring me ten suits of silk, so she brought them and laid
them on my person, and this dress I have on my body is one of
them.  Moreover, he made bring one of the best of his she-
dromedaries [FN#126] carrying stuffs and provaunt, he bade her
also bring a sorrel horse, and when they were brought he gave the
whole of them to me.  I abode with them three days, eating and
drinking, and what he gave me of gifts is with me to this
present.  At the end of the three days he said to me, "O Hammad,
O my brother, I would sleep awhile and take my rest and verily I
trust my life to thee; but, if thou see horsemen making hither,
fear not, for know that they are of the Banu Sa'labah, seeking to
wage war on me." Then he laid his sword under his head-pillow and
slept; and when he was drowned in slumber Iblis tempted me to
slay him; so I arose in haste, and drawing the sword from under
his head, dealt him a blow that made his head fall from his body. 
But his sister knew what I had done, and rushing out from within
the tent, threw herself on his corpse, rending her raiment and
repeating these couplets,

"To kith and kin bear thou sad tidings of our plight; *
     From doom th' All-wise decreed shall none of men take
     flight:
Low art thou laid, O brother!  strewn upon the stones, *
     With face that mirrors moon when shining brightest bright!
Good sooth, it is a day accurst, thy slaughter-day *
     Shivering thy spear that won the day in many a fight!
Now thou be slain no rider shall delight in steed, *
     Nor man child shall the breeding woman bring to light.
This morn Hammad uprose and foully murthered thee, *
     Falsing his oath and troth with foulest perjury."

When she had ended her verse she said to me, "O thou of accursed
forefathers, wherefore didst thou play my brother false and slay
him when he purposed returning thee to thy native land with
provisions; and it was his intent also to marry thee to me at the
first of the month?" Then she drew a sword she had with her, and
planting the hilt in the earth, with the point set to her breast,
she bent over it and threw herself thereon till the blade issued
from her back and she fell to the ground, dead.  I mourned for
her and wept and repented when repentance availed me naught. 
Then I arose in haste and went to the tent and, taking whatever
was light of load and weighty of worth, went my way; but in my
haste and horror I took no heed of my dead comrades, nor did I
bury the maiden and the youth.  And this my tale is still more
wondrous than the story of the serving-girl I kidnapped from the
Holy City, Jerusalem.  But when Nuzhat al-Zaman heard these words
from the Badawi, the light was changed in her eyes to night.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Forty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Nuzhat
al-Zaman heard these words from the Badawi, the light was changed
in her eyes to night, and she rose and drawing the sword, smote
Hammad the Arab between the shoulder-blades so that the point
issued from the apple of his throat. [FN#127]  And when all
present asked her, 'Why hast thou made haste to slay him;" she
answered, "Praised be Allah who hath granted me in my life tide
to avenge myself with mine own hand!" And she bade the slaves
drag the body out by the feet and cast it to the dogs.  Thereupon
they turned to the two prisoners who remained of the three; and
one of them was a black slave, so they said to him, What is thy
name, fellow?  Tell us the truth of thy case." He replied, "As
for me my name is Al-Ghazban," and acquainted them what had
passed between himself and Queen Abrizah, daughter of King
Hardub, Lord of Greece, and how he had slain her and fled. 
Hardly had the negro made an end of his story, when King Rumzan
struck off his head with his scymitar, saying, Praise to Allah
who gave me life!  I have avenged my mother with my own hand."
Then he repeated to them what his nurse Marjanah had told him of
this same slave whose name was Al-Ghazban; after which they
turned to the third prisoner.  Now this was the very camel-
driver [FN#128] whom the people of the Holy City, Jerusalem, hired
to carry Zau al-Makan and lodge him in the hospital at Damascus
of Syria; but he threw him down on the ashes midden and went his
way.  And they said to him, "Acquaint us with thy case and tell
the truth." So he related to them all that had happened to him
with Sultan Zau al-Makan; how he had been carried from the Holy
City, at the time when he was sick, till they made Damascus and
he had been thrown into the hospital; how also the Jerusalem folk
had paid the cameleer money to transport the stranger to
Damascus, and he had taken it and fled after casting his charge
upon the midden by the side of the ash-heap of the Hammam.  But
when he ended his words, Sultan Kanmakan took his sword
forthright and cut off his head, saying, "Praised be Allah who
hath given me life, that I might requite this traitor what he did
with my father, for I have heard this very story from King Zau
al-Makan himself." Then the Kings said each to other, "It
remaineth only for us to wreak our revenge upon the old woman
Shawahi, yclept Zat al-Dawahi, because she is the prime cause of
all these calamities and cast us into adversity on this wise. 
Who will deliver her into our hands that we may avenge ourselves
upon her and wipe out our dishonour?" And King Rumzan said,
"Needs must we bring her hither." So without stay or delay he
wrote a letter to his grandmother, the aforesaid ancient woman,
giving her to know therein that he had subdued the kingdoms of
Damascus and Mosul and Irak, and had broken up the host of the
Moslems and captured their princes, adding, "I desire thee of all
urgency to come to me, bringing with thee Queen Sophia, daughter
of King Afridun, and whom thou wilt of the Nazarene chiefs, but
no armies; for the country is quiet and wholly under our hand."
And when she read the letter and recognised the handwriting of
King Rumzan, she rejoiced with great joy and forthright equipping
herself and Queen Sophia, set out with their attendants and
journeyed, without stopping, till they drew near Baghdad.  Then
she foresent a messenger to acquaint the King of her arrival,
whereupon quoth Rumzan, "We should do well to don the habit of
the Franks and fare forth to meet the old woman, to the intent
that we may be assured against her craft and perfidy." Whereto
Kanmakan replied, "Hearing is consenting." So they clad
themselves in Frankish clothes and, when Kuzia Fakan saw them,
she exclaimed, "By the truth of the Lord of Worship, did I not
know you, I should take you to be indeed Franks!" Then they
sallied forth with a thousand horse, King Rumzan riding on before
them, to meet the old woman.  As soon as his eyes fell on hers,
he dismounted and walked towards her and she, recognizing him,
dismounted also and embraced him, but he pressed her ribs with
his hands, till he well nigh broke them.  Quoth she, "What is
this, O my son?" But before she had done speaking, up came
Kanmakan and Dandan; and the horsemen with them cried out at the
women and slaves and took them all prisoners.  Then the two Kings
returned to Baghdad, with their captives, and Rumzan bade them
decorate the city which they did for three days, at the end of
which they brought out the old woman Shawahi, highs Zat al-
Dawahi, with a peaked red turband of palm-leaves on her head,
diademed with asses' dung and preceded by a herald proclaiming
aloud, "This is the reward of those who presume to lay hands on
Kings and the sons of Kings!" Then they crucified her on one of
the gates of Baghdad; and, when her companions saw what befel
her, all embraced in a body the faith of Al-Islam.  As for
Kanmakan and his uncle Rumzan and his aunt Nuzhat al-Zaman and
the Wazir Dandan, they marvelled at the wonderful events that had
betided them and bade the scribes chronicle them in books that
those who came after might read.  Then they all abode for the
remainder of their days in the enjoyment of every solace and
comfort of life, till there overtook them the Destroyer of all
delights and the Sunderer of all societies.  And this is the
whole that hath come down to us of the dealings of fortune with
King Omar bin al-Nu'uman and his sons Sharrkan and Zau al-Makan
and his son's son Kanmakan and his daughter Nuzhat al-Zaman and
her daughter Kuzia Fakan.  Thereupon quoth Shahryar to Shahrazad,
"I desire that thou tell me somewhat about birds;" and hearing
this Dunyazad said to her sister, "I have never seen the Sultan
light at heart all this while till the present night, and his
pleasure garreth me hope that the issue for thee with him may be
a happy issue." Then drowsiness overcame the Sultan, so he
slept; [FN#129]--And Shahrazad perceived the approach of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Forty-sixth Night,

Shahrazad began to relate, in these words, the tale of




                  THE BIRDS AND BEASTS AND THE
                       CARPENTER [FN#130]



Quoth she, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that in times
of yore and in ages long gone before, a peacock abode with his
wife on the seashore. Now the place was infested with lions and
all manner wild beasts, withal it abounded in trees and streams.
So cock and hen were wont to roost by night upon one of the
trees, being in fear of the beasts, and went forth by day
questing food. And they ceased not thus to do till their fear
increased on them and they searched for some place wherein to
dwell other than their old dwelling place; and in the course of
their search behold, they happened on an island abounding in
streams and trees. So they alighted there and ate of its fruits
and drank of its waters. But whilst they were thus engaged, lo!
up came to them a duck in a state of extreme terror, and stayed
not faring forwards till she reached the tree whereon were
perched the two peafowl, when she seemed re assured in mind. The
peacock doubted not but that she had some rare story; so he asked
her of her case and the cause of her concern, whereto she
answered, "I am sick for sorrow, and my horror of the son of
Adam: [FN#131] so beware, and again I say beware of the sons of
Adam!" Rejoined the peacock, "Fear not now that thou hast won our
protection." Cried the duck, "Alhamdolillah! glory to God, who
hath done away my cark and care by means of you being near! For
indeed I come of friendship fain with you twain." And when she
had ended her speech the peacock's wife came down to her and
said, "Well come and welcome and fair cheer! No harm shall hurt
thee: how can son of Adam come to us and we in this isle which
lieth amiddlemost of the sea? From the land he cannot reach us
neither can he come against us from the water. So be of good
cheer and tell us what hath betided thee from the child of Adam."
Answered the duck, "Know, then, O thou peahen, that of a truth I
have dwelt all my life in this island safely and peacefully, nor
have I seen any disquieting thing, till one night, as I was
asleep, I sighted in my dream the semblance of a son of Adam, who
talked with me and I with him. Then I heard a voice say to me, 'O
thou duck, beware of the son of Adam and be not imposed on by his
words nor by that he may suggest to thee; for he aboundeth in
wiles and guiles; so beware with all wariness of his perfidy, for
again I say, he is crafty and right cunning even as singeth of
him the poet,

     He'll offer sweetmeats with his edged tongue, *
         And fox thee with the foxy guile of fox. 

And know thou that the son of Adam circumventeth the fishes and
draweth them forth of the seas; and he shooteth the birds with a
pellet of clay [FN#132] and trappeth the elephant with his craft.
None is safe from his mischief and neither bird nor beast
escapeth him; and on this wise have I told thee what I have heard
concerning the son of Adam.' So I awoke, fearful and trembling
and from that hour to this my heart hath not known gladness, for
dread of the son of Adam, lest he surprise me unawares by his
wile or trap me in his snares. By the time the end of the day
overtook me, my strength was grown weak and my spunk failed me;
so, desiring to eat and drink, I went forth walking, troubled in
spirit and with a heart ill at ease. Now when I reached yonder
mountain I saw a tawny lion whelp at the door of a cave, and
sighting me he joyed in me with great joy, for my colour pleased
him and my gracious shape; so he cried out to me saying, 'Draw
nigh unto me.' I went up to him and he asked me, 'What is thy
name, and what is thy nature?' Answered I, 'My name is Duck, and
I am of the bird kind;' and I added, 'But thou, why tarriest thou
in this place till this time?' Answered the whelp, 'My father the
lion hath for many a day warned me against the son of Adam, and
it came to pass this night that I saw in my sleep the semblance
of a son of Adam.' And he went on to tell me the like of that I
have told you. When I heard these words, I said to him, 'O lion,
I take asylum with thee, that thou mayest kill the son of Adam
and be steadfast in resolve to his slaughter; verily I fear him
for myself with extreme fear and to my fright affright is added
for that thou also dreadest the son of Adam, albeit thou art
Sultan of savage beasts.' Then I ceased not, O my sister, to bid
the young lion beware of the son of Adam and urge him to slay
him, till he rose of a sudden and at once from his stead and went
out and he fared on, and I after him and I noted him lashing
flanks with tail. We advanced in the same order till we came to a
place where the roads forked and saw a cloud of dust arise which,
presently clearing away, discovered below it a runaway naked ass,
now galloping and running at speed and now rolling in the dust.
When the lion saw the ass, he cried out to him, and he came up to
him in all humility. Then said the lion, 'Harkye, crack brain
brute! What is thy kind and what be the cause of thy coming
hither?' He replied, 'O son of the Sultan! I am by kind an ass--
Asinus Caballus--and the cause of my coming to this place is that
I am fleeing from the son of Adam.' Asked the lion whelp, 'Dost
thou fear then that he will kill thee?' Answered the ass, 'Not
so, O son of the Sultan, but I dread lest he put a cheat on me
and mount upon me; for he hath a thing called Pack saddle, which
he setteth on my back; also a thing called Girths which he
bindeth about my belly; and a thing called Crupper which he
putteth under my tail, and a thing called Bit which he placeth in
my mouth: and he fashioneth me a goad [FN#133] and goadeth me with
it and maketh me run more than my strength. If I stumble he
curseth me, and if I bray, he revileth me; [FN#134] and at last
when I grow old and can no longer run, he putteth on me a
panel [FN#135] of wood and delivereth me to the water carriers,
who load my back with water from the river in skins and other
vessels, such as jars, and I cease not to wone in misery and
abasement and fatigue till I die, when they cast me on the
rubbish-heaps to the dogs. So what grief can surpass this grief
and what calamities can be greater than these calamities?' Now
when I heard, O peahen, the ass's words, my skin shuddered, and
became as gooseflesh at the son of Adam; and I said to the lion
whelp, 'O my lord, the ass of a verity hath excuse and his words
add terror to my terror.' Then quoth the young lion to the ass,
'Whither goest thou?' Quoth he, 'Before sunrise I espied the son
of Adam afar off, and fled from him; and now I am minded to flee
forth and run without ceasing for the greatness of my fear of
him, so haply I may find me a place of shelter from the
perfidious son of Adam.' Whilst the ass was thus discoursing with
the lion whelp, seeking the while to take leave of us and go
away, behold, appeared to us another cloud of dust, whereat the
ass brayed and cried out and looked hard and let fly a loud
fart [FN#136]. After a while the dust lifted and discovered a
black steed finely dight with a blaze on the forehead like a
dirham round and bright; [FN#137] handsomely marked about the hoof
with white and with firm strong legs pleasing to sight and he
neighed with affright. This horse ceased not running till he
stood before the whelp, the son of the lion who, when he saw him,
marvelled and made much of him and said, 'What is thy kind, O
majestic wild beast and wherefore freest thou into this desert
wide and vast?' He replied, O lord of wild beasts, I am a steed
of the horse kind, and the cause of my running is that I am
fleeing from the son of Adam.' The lion whelp wondered at the
horse's speech and cried to him 'Speak not such words for it is
shame to thee, seeing that thou art tall and stout. And how
cometh it that thou fearest the son of Adam, thou, with thy bulk
of body and thy swiftness of running when I, for all my
littleness of stature am resolved to encounter the son of Adam
and, rushing on him, eat his flesh, that I may allay the affright
of this poor duck and make her dwell in peace in her own place?
But now thou hast come here and thou hast wrung my heart with thy
talk and turned me back from what I had resolved to do, seeing
that, for all thy bulk, the son of Adam hath mastered thee and
hath feared neither thy height nor thy breadth, albeit, wert thou
to kick him with one hoof thou wouldst kill him, nor could he
prevail against thee, but thou wouldst make him drink the cup of
death.' The horse laughed when he heard the whelps words and
replied, 'Far, far is it from my power to overcome him, O Prince.
Let not my length and my breadth nor yet my bulk delude thee with
respect to the son of Adam; for that he, of the excess of his
guile and his wiles, fashioneth me a thing called Hobble and
applieth to my four legs a pair of ropes made of palm fibres
bound with felt, and gibbeteth me by the head to a high peg, so
that I being tied up remain standing and can neither sit nor lie
down. And when he is minded to ride me, he bindeth on his feet a
thing of iron called Stirrup [FN#138] and layeth on my back
another thing called Saddle, which he fasteneth by two Girths
passed under my armpits. Then he setteth in my mouth a thing of
iron he calleth Bit, to which he tieth a thing of leather called
Rein; and, when he sitteth in the saddle on my back, he taketh
the rein in his hand and guideth me with it, goading my flanks
the while with the shovel stirrups till he maketh them bleed. So
do not ask, O son of our Sultan, the hardships I endure from the
son of Adam. And when I grow old and lean and can no longer run
swiftly, he selleth me to the miller who maketh me turn in the
mill, and I cease not from turning night and day till I grow
decrepit. Then he in turn vendeth me to the knacker who cutteth
my throat and flayeth off my hide and plucketh out my tail, which
he selleth to the sieve maker; and he melteth down my fat for
tallow candles.' When the young lion heard the horse's words, his
rage and vexation redoubled and he said, 'When didst thou leave
the son of Adam? Replied the horse, 'At midday and he is upon my
track.' Whilst the whelp was thus conversing with the horse lo!
there rose a cloud of dust and, presently opening out, discovered
below it a furious camel gurgling and pawing the earth with his
feet and never ceasing so to do till he came up with us. Now when
the lion whelp saw how big and buxom he was, he took him to be
the son of Adam and was about to spring upon him when I said to
him, 'O Prince, of a truth this is not the son of Adam, this be a
camel, and he seemeth to fleeing from the son of Adam.' As I was
thus conversing, O my sister, with the lion whelp, the camel came
up and saluted him; whereupon he returned the greeting and said,
'What bringeth thee hither?' Replied he, 'I came here fleeing
from the son of Adam.' Quoth the whelp, 'And thou, with thy huge
frame and length and breadth, how cometh it that thou fearest the
son of Adam, seeing that with one kick of thy foot thou wouldst
kill him?' Quoth the camel, 'O son of the Sultan, know that the
son of Adam hath subtleties and wiles, which none can withstand
nor can any prevail against him, save only Death; for he putteth
into my nostrils a twine of goat's hair he calleth Nose-
ring, [FN#139] and over my head a thing he calleth Halter; then he
delivereth me to the least of his little children, and the
youngling draweth me along by the nose ring, my size and strength
notwithstanding. Then they load me with the heaviest of burdens
and go long journeys with me and put me to hard labour through
the hours of the night and the day. When I grow old and stricken
in years and disabled from working, my master keepeth me not with
him, but selleth me to the knacker who cutteth my throat and
vendeth my hide to the tanners and my flesh to the cooks: so do
not ask the hardships I suffer from the son of Adam.' 'When didst
thou leave the son of Adam?' asked the young lion; and he
answered, 'At sundown, and I suppose that coming to my place
after my departure and not finding me there, he is now in search
of me: wherefore let me go, O son of the Sultan, that I may flee
into the wolds and the wilds.' Said the whelp, 'Wait awhile, O
camel, till thou see how I will tear him, and give thee to eat of
his flesh, whilst I craunch his bones and drink his blood.'
Replied the camel, 'O King's son, I fear for thee from the child
of Adam, for he is wily and guilefull.' And he began repeating
these verses:--

    'When the tyrant enters the lieges' land, *
          Naught remains for the lieges but quick remove!'

Now whilst the camel was speaking with the lion whelp, behold,
there rose a cloud of dust which, after a time, opened and showed
an old man scanty of stature and lean of limb; and he bore on his
shoulder a basket of carpenter's tools and on his head a branch
of a tree and eight planks. He led little children by the hand
and came on at a trotting pace, [FN#140] never stopping till he
drew near the whelp. When I saw him, O my sister, I fell down for
excess of fear; but the young lion rose and walked forward to
meet the carpenter and when he came up to him, the man smiled in
his face and said to him, with a glib tongue and in courtly
terms, 'O King who defendeth from harm and lord of the long arm,
Allah prosper thine evening and thine endeavouring and increase
thy valiancy and strengthen thee! Protect me from that which hath
distressed me and with its mischief hath oppressed me, for I have
found no helper save only thyself.' And the carpenter stood in
his presence weeping and wailing and complaining. When the whelp
heard his sighing and his crying he said, 'I will succour thee
from that thou fearest. Who hath done thee wrong and what art
thou, O wild beast, whose like in my life I never saw, nor ever
espied one goodlier of form or more eloquent of tongue than thou?
What is thy case?' Replied the man, 'O lord of wild beasts, as to
myself I am a carpenter; but as to who hath wronged me, verily he
is a son of Adam, and by break of dawn after this coming
night [FN#141] he will be with thee in this place.' When the lion
whelp heard these words of the carpenter, the light was changed
to night before his sight and he snorted and roared with ire and
his eyes cast forth sparks of fire. Then he cried out saying, 'By
Allah, I will assuredly watch through this coming night till
dawn, nor will I return to my father till I have won my will.'
Then he turned to the carpenter and asked, 'Of a truth I see thou
art short of step and I would not hurt thy feelings for that I am
generous of heart; yet do I deem thee unable to keep pace with
the wild beasts: tell me then whither thou goest?' Answered the
carpenter, 'Know that I am on my way to thy father's Wazir, the
lynx; for when he heard that the son of Adam had set foot in this
country he feared greatly for himself and sent one of the wild
beasts on a message for me, to make him a house wherein he should
dwell, that it might shelter him and fend off his enemy from him,
so not one of the sons of Adam should come at him. Accordingly I
took up these planks and set forth to find him.' Now when the
young lion heard these words he envied the lynx and said to the
carpenter, 'By my life there is no help for it but thou make me a
house with these planks ere thou make one for Sir Lynx! When thou
hast done my work, go to him and make him whatso he wisheth.' The
carpenter replied, 'O lord of wild beasts, I cannot make thee
aught till I have made the lynx what he desireth: then will I
return to thy service and build thee a house as a fort to ward
thee from thy foe.' Exclaimed the lion whelp, 'By Allah, 'I will
not let thee leave this place till thou build me a house of
planks.' So saying he made for the carpenter and sprang upon him,
thinking to jest with him, and cuffed him with his paw knocking
the basket off his shoulder; and threw him down in a fainting
fit, whereupon the young lion laughed at him and said, 'Woe to
thee, O carpenter, of a truth thou art feeble and hast no force;
so it is excusable in thee to fear the son of Adam.' Now when the
carpenter fell on his back, he waxed exceeding wroth; but he
dissembled his wrath for fear of the whelp and sat up and smiled
in his face, saying, 'Well, I will make for thee the house.' With
this he took the planks he had brought and nailed together the
house, which he made in the form of a chest after the measure of
the young lion. And he left the door open, for he had cut in the
box a large aperture, to which he made a stout cover and bored
many holes therein. Then he took out some newly wrought nails and
a hammer and said to the young lion, 'Enter the house through
this opening, that I may fit it to thy measure.' Thereat the
whelp rejoiced and went up to the opening, but saw that it was
strait; and the carpenter said to him, 'Enter and crouch down on
thy legs and arms!' So the whelp did thus and entered the chest,
but his tail remained outside. Then he would have drawn back and
come . out; but the carpenter said to him, 'Wait patiently a
while till I see if there be room for thy tail with thee.' The
young lion did as he was bid when the carpenter twisted up his
tail and, stuffing it into the chest, whipped the lid on to the
opening and nailed it down; whereat the whelp cried out and said,
'O carpenter, what is this narrow house thou hast made me? Let me
out, sirrah!' But the carpenter answered, 'Far be it, far be it
from thy thought! Repentance for past avails naught, and indeed
of this place thou shalt not come out.' He then laughed and
resumed, 'Verily thou art fallen into the trap and from thy
duress there is no escape, O vilest of wild beasts!' Rejoined the
whelp, 'O my brother, what manner of words are these thou
addresses" to me?' The carpenter replied 'know, O dog of the
desert! that thou hast fa]len into that which thou fearedst: Fate
hath upset thee, nor shall caution set thee up. ' When the whelp
heard these words, O my sister, he knew that this was indeed the
very son of Adam, against whom he had been warned by his sire in
waking state and by the mysterious Voice in sleeping while; and I
also was certified that this was indeed he without doubt;
wherefore great fear of him for myself seized me and I withdrew a
little apart from him and waited to see what he would do with the
young lion. Then I saw, O my sister, the son of Adam dig a pit in
that place hard by the chest which held the whelp and, throwing
the box into the hole, heap dry wood upon it and burn the young
lion with fire. At this sight, O sister mine, my fear of the son
of Adam redoubled and in my affright I have been these two days
fleeing from him." But when the peahen heard from the duck this
story,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Forty-seventh Night,

 She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
peahen heard from the duck this story, she wondered with
exceeding wonder and said to her, "O my sister, here thou art
safe from the son of Adam, for we are in one of the islands of
the sea whither there is no way for the son of Adam; so do thou
take up thine abode with us till Allah make easy thy case and our
case. Quoth the duck, "I fear lest some calamity come upon me by
night, for no runaway can rid him of fate by flight." Rejoined
the peahen, "Abide with us, and be like unto, us;" and ceased not
to persuade her, till she yielded, saying, "O my sister, thou
knowest how weak is my resistance; but verily had I not seen thee
here, I had not remained." Said the peahen, "That which is on our
foreheads [FN#142] we must indeed fulfil, and when our doomed day
draweth near, who shall deliver us? But not a soul departeth
except it have accomplished its predestined livelihood and term.
Now the while they talked thus, a cloud of dust appeared and
approached them, at sight of which the duck shrieked aloud and
ran down into the sea, crying out, "Beware! beware! though flight
there is not from Fate and Lot!" [FN#143] After awhile the dust
opened out and discovered under it an antelope; whereat the duck
and the peahen were reassured and the peacock's wife said to her
companion, "O my sister, this thou seest and wouldst have me
beware of is an antelope, and here he is, making for us. He will
do us no hurt, for the antelope feedeth upon the herbs of the
earth and, even as thou art of the bird kind, so is he of the
beast kind. Be there fore of good cheer and cease care taking;
for care taking wasteth the body." Hardly had the peahen done
speaking, when the antelope came up to them, thinking to shelter
him under the shade of the tree; and, sighting the peahen and the
duck, saluted them and said, 'I came to this island to-day and I
have seen none richer in herbage nor pleasanter for habitation."
Then he besought them for company and amity and, when they saw
his friendly behaviour to them, they welcomed him and gladly
accepted his offer. So they struck up a sincere friendship and
sware thereto; and they slept in one place and they ate and drank
together; nor did they cease dwelling in safety, eating and
drinking their fill, till one day there came thither a ship which
had strayed from her course in the sea. She cast anchor near them
and the crew came forth and dispersed about the island. They soon
caught sight of the three friends, antelope, peahen and duck, and
made for them; whereupon the peahen flew up into the tree and
thence winged her way through air; and the antelope fled into the
desert, but the duck abode paralyzed by fear. So they chased her
till they caught her and she cried out and said, "Caution availed
me naught against Fate and Lot!'; and they bore her off to the
ship. Now when the peahen saw what had betided the duck, she
removed from the island, saying, "I see that misfortunes lie in
ambush for all. But for yonder ship, parting had not befallen
between me and this duck, because she was one of the truest of
friends." Then she flew off and rejoined the antelope, who
saluted her and gave her joy of her safety and asked for the
duck, to which she replied, "The enemy hath taken her, and I
loathe the sojourn of this island after her." Then she wept for
the loss of the duck and began repeating,

     "The day of parting cut my heart in twain:*
          In twain may Allah cut the parting-day!

And she spake also this couplet,

     "I pray some day that we reunion gain, *
         So may I tell him Parting's ugly way."

The antelope sorrowed with great sorrow, but dissuaded the peahen
from her resolve to remove from the island. So they abode there
together with him, eating and drinking, in peace and safety,
except that they ceased not to mourn for the loss of the duck;
and the antelope said to the peahen, "O my sister, thou seest how
the folk who came forth of the ship were the cause of our
severance from the duck and of her destruction; so do thou beware
of them and guard thyself from them and from the wile of the son
of Adam and his guile." But the peahen replied, I am assured that
nought caused her death save her neglecting to say Subhan' Allah,
glory to God; indeed I often said to her, 'Exclaim thou, 'Praised
be Allah, and verily I fear for thee, because thou neglectest to
laud the Almighty; for all things created by Allah glorify Him on
this wise, and whoso neglecteth the formula of praise [FN#144] him
destruction waylays.'" When the antelope heard the peahen's words
he exclaimed, "Allah make fair thy face!" and betook himself to
repeating the formula of praise, and ceased not there from a
single hour. And it is said that his form of adoration was as
follows, "Praise be to the Requiter of every good and evil thing,
the Lord of Majesty and of Kings the King!" And a tale is also
told on this wise of




                          The Hermits.



A certain hermit worshipped on a certain mountain, whither
resorted a pair of pigeons; and the worshipper was wont to make
two parts of his daily bread,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Forty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
worshipper was wont to make two parts of his daily bread, eating
one half himself and giving the other to the pigeon pair. He also
prayed for them both that they might be blest with issue so they
increased and multiplied greatly. Now they resorted only to that
mountain where the hermit was, and the reason of their fore-
gathering with the holy man was their assiduity in repeating
"Praised be Allah!" for it is recounted that the pigeon [FN#145]
in praise, "Praised be the Creator of all Creatures, the
Distributor of daily bread, the Builder of the heavens and
Dispreader of the earths!" And that couple ceased not to dwell
together in the happiest of life, they and their brood till the
holy man died, when the company of the pigeons was broken up and
they dispersed among the towns and villages and mountains. Now it
is told that on a certain other mountain there dwelt a shepherd,
a man of piety and good sense and chastity; and he had flocks of
sheep which he tended, and he made his living by their milk and
wool. The mountain which gave him a home abounded in trees and
pasturage and also in wild beasts, but these had no power over
his flocks; so he ceased not to dwell upon that highland in full
security, taking no thought to the things of the world, by reason
of his beatitude and his assiduity in prayer and devotion, till
Allah ordained that he should fall sick with exceeding sickness.
Thereupon he betook himself to a cavern in the mountain and his
sheep used to go out in the morning to the pasturage and take
refuge at night in the cave. But Allah Almighty, being minded to
try him and prove his patience and his obedience, sent him one of
His angels, who came in to him in the semblance of a fair woman
and sat down before him. When the shepherd saw that woman seated
before him, his flesh shuddered at her with horripilation [FN#146]
and he said to her, 'O thou woman, what was it invited thee to
this my retreat? I have no need of thee, nor is there aught
betwixt me and thee which calleth for thy coming in to me." Quoth
she, "O man, cost thou not behold my beauty and loveliness and
the fragrance of my breath; and knowest thou not the need women
have of men and men of women? So who shall forbid thee from me
when I have chosen to be near thee and desire to enjoy thy
company? Indeed, I come to thee willingly and do not withhold
myself from thee, and near us there is none whom we need fear;
and I wish to abide with thee as long as thou sojournest in this
mountain, and be thy companion and thy true friend. I offer
myself to thee, for thou needest the service of woman: and if
thou have carnal connection with me and know me, thy sickness
shall be turned from thee and health return to thee; and thou
wilt repent thee of the past for having foresworn the company of
women during the days that are now no more. In very sooth, I give
thee good advice: so incline to my counsel and approach me."
Quoth the shepherd, "Go out from me, O woman deceitful and
perfidious! I will not incline to thee nor approach thee. I want
not thy company nor wish for union with thee; he who coveteth the
coming life renounceth thee, for thou seducest mankind, those of
past time and those of present time. Allah the Most High lieth in
wait for His servants and woe unto him who is cursed with thy
company!" Answered she, "O thou that errest from the truth and
wanderest from the way of reason, turn thy face to me and look
upon my charms and take thy full of my nearness, as did the wise
who have gone before thee. Indeed, they were richer than thou in
experience and sharper of wit; withal they rejected not, as thou
rejectest, the enjoyment of women; nay, they took their pleasure
of them and their company even as thou renouncest them, and it
did them no hurt in things temporal or things spiritual.
Wherefore do thou recede from thy resolve and thou shalt praise
the issue of thy case." Rejoined the shepherd, "All thou sayest I
deny and abhor, and all thou offerest I reject: for thou art
cunning and perfidious and there is no honesty in thee nor is
there honour. How much of foulness hidest thou under thy beauty,
and how many a pious man hast thou seduced from his duty and made
his end penitence and perdition? Avaunt from me, O thou who
devotest thyself to corrupt others!" Thereupon, he threw his
goat's hair cloak over his head that he might not see her face,
and betook himself to calling upon the name of his Lord. And when
the angel saw the excellence of his submission to the Divine
Will, he went out from him and ascended to heaven. Now hard by
the hermit's hill was a village wherein dwelt a pious man, who
knew not the other's station, till one night he heard in a dream
a Voice saying to him, "In such a place near to thee is a devout
man: go thou to him and be at his command!" So when morning
dawned he set out to wend thither, and what time the heat was
grievous upon him, he came to a tree which grew beside a spring
of running water. So he sat down to rest in the shadow of that
tree and  behold, he saw beasts and birds coming to that fount to
drink, but when they caught sight of the devotee sitting there,
they took fright and fled from before his face. Then said he,
"There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah! I rest
not here but to the hurt of these beasts and fowls." So he arose,
blaming him self and saying, "Verily my tarrying here this day
hath wronged these animals, and what excuse have I towards my
Creator and the Creator of these birds and beasts for that I was
the cause of their flight from their drink and their daily food
and their place of pasturage? Alas for my shame before my Lord on
the day when He shall avenge the hornless sheep on the sheep with
horns!'' [FN#147] And he wept and began repeating these couplets,

"Now an, by Allah, unto man were fully known *
     Why he is made, in careless sleep he ne'er would wone:
First Death, then cometh Wake and dreadful Day of Doom, *
     Reproof with threats sore terror, frightful malison.
Bid we or else forbid we, all of us are like *
     The Cave companions [FN#148] when at length their sleep was
     done."

Then he again wept for that he had driven the birds and beasts
from the spring by sitting down under the tree, and he fared on
till he came to the shepherd's dwelling and going in, saluted
him. The shepherd returned his salutation and embraced him,
weeping and saying, "What hath brought thee to this place where
no man hath ever yet come to me." Quoth the other devotee, "I saw
in my sleep one who described to me this thy stead and bade me
repair to thee and salute thee: so I came, in obedience to the
commandment." The shepherd welcomed him, rejoicing in his company
and the twain abode upon that mountain, worshipping Allah with
the best of worship; and they ceased not serving their Lord in
the cavern and living upon the flesh and milk of their sheep,
having clean put away from them riches and children and what not,
till the Certain, the Inevitable became their lot. And this is
the end of their story. Then said King Shahyrar, "O Shahrazad,
thou wouldst cause me to renounce my kingdom and thou makest me
repent of having slain so many women and maidens. Hast thou any
bird stories?" "Yes," replied she, and began to tell the 




            TALE OF THE WATER FOWL AND THE TORTOISE.



It is related by truthful men, O King, that a certain bird flew
high up firmament wards and presently lit on a rock in the midst
of water which was running. And as he sat there, behold, the
current carried to him the carcass of a man, and lodged it
against the rock, for being swollen it floated. The bird, which
was a water fowl, drew near and examining it, found that it was
the dead body of a son of Adam and saw in it sign of spear and
stroke of sword. So he said to himself, "I presume that this man
who hath been slain was some evil doer, and that a company banded
themselves together against him and put him to death and were at
peace from him and his evil doing." And as he continued
marvelling at this, suddenly the vultures and kites came down
upon the carcass from all sides and get round it; which when the
water fowl saw, he feared with sore affright and said, "I cannot
abide here any longer." So he flew away in quest of a place where
he might wone, till that carcass should come to an end and the
birds of prey leave it; and he stayed not in his flight, till he
found a river with a tree in its midst. So he alighted on the
tree, troubled and distraught and sore grieved for departing from
his birth place, and said to himself, "Verily sorrows cease not
to follow me: I was at my ease when I saw that carcass, and
rejoiced therein with much joy, saying, 'This is a gift of daily
bread which Allah hath dealt to me:' but my joy became annoy and
my gladness turned to sadness, for the ravenous birds, which are
like lions, seized upon it and tare it to pieces and came between
me and my prize So how can I hope to be secure from misfortune in
this world, or put any trust therein? Indeed, the proverb
saith,'The world is the dwelling of him who hath no dwelling': he
who hath no wits is cozened by it and entrusteth it with his
wealth and his child and his family and his folk; and whoso is
cozened ceaseth not to rely upon it, pacing proudly upon earth
until he is laid under earth and the dust is cast over his corpse
by him who of all men was dearest to him and nearest. But naught
is better for generous youth than patience under its cares and
miseries. I have left my native place and it is abhorrent to me
to quit my brethren and friends and loved ones." Now whilst he
was thus musing lo! a male tortoise descended into the river and,
approaching the water fowl, saluted him, saying, "O my lord, what
hath exiled thee and driven thee so far from thy place?" Replied
the water fowl, "The descent of enemies thereon; for the wise
brooketh not the neighbourhood of his foe; and how well saith the
poet,

Whenas on any land the oppressor doth alight, *
     There's nothing left for those, that dwell therein, but
     flight.''' [FN#149]

Quoth the tortoise, "If the matter be as thou sayest and the case
as thou describest, I will not leave thee nor cease to stand
before thee, that I may do thy need and fulfil thy service; for
it is said that there is no sorer desolation than that of him who
is an exile, cut off from friends and home; and it is also said
that no calamity equalleth that of severance from the good; but
the best solace for men of understanding is to seek companionship
in strangerhood and be patient under sorrows and adversity.
Wherefore I hope that thou wilt approve of my company, for I will
be to thee a servant and a helper." Now when the water fowl heard
the tortoise's words he answered, "Verily, thou art right in what
thou sayest for, by my life, I have found grief and pain in
separation, what while I have been parted from my place and
sundered from my brethren and friends; seeing that in severance
is an admonition to him who will be admonished and matter of
thought for him who will take thought. If the generous youth find
not a companion to console him, weal is forever cut off from him
and ill is eternally established with him; and there is nothing
for the sage but to solace himself in every event with brethren
and be constant in patience and endurance: indeed these two are
praiseworthy qualities, and both uphold one under calamities and
vicissitudes of the world and ward off startling sorrows and
harrowing cares, come what will." Rejoined the tortoise, "Beware
of sorrow, for it will spoil thy life and waste thy manliness."
And the two gave not over conversing till the bird said, "Never
shall I cease fearing the shifts of time and vicissitudes of
events." When the tortoise heard this, he came up to him and,
kissing him between the eyes, said to him, "Never may the company
of the birds cease to be blest in thee and through thee, and find
wisdom in thy good counsel! How shalt thou be burdened with care
and harm?" And he went on to comfort the water fowl and soothe
his terrors till he became reassured. Then he flew to the place
where the carcass was and found on arriving there the birds of
prey gone, and they had left nothing of the body but bones;
whereupon he returned to the tortoise and acquainted him with the
fact that the foe had disappeared from his place, saying, "Know
that of a truth I long for return homewards to enjoy the society
of my friends; for the sage cannot endure separation from his
native place." So they both went thither and found naught to
affright them; whereupon the water fowl began repeating,

"And haply whenas strait descends on lot of generous youth *
     Right sore, with Allah only lies his issue from annoy:
He's straitened, but full oft when rings and meshes straitest
     clip, * He 'scapes his strait and joyance finds, albe I see
     no joy."

So the twain abode in that island; and while the water fowl was
enjoying a life of peace and gladness, suddenly Fate led thither
a hungry falcon, which drove its talons into the bird's belly and
killed him, nor did caution avail him when his term of life was
ended. Now the cause of his death was that he neglected to use
the formula of praise, and it is said that his form of adoration
was as follows, "Praised be our Lord in that He ordereth and
ordaineth; and praised be our Lord in that He enricheth and
impoverisheth!" Such was the waterfowl's end and the tale of the
ravenous birds. And when it was finished quoth the Sultan, "O
Shahrazad, verily thou overwhelmest me with admonitions and
salutary instances. Hast thou any stories of beasts?" "Yes,"
answered she, and began to tell the




             TALE OF THE WOLF AND THE FOX. [FN#150]



Know, O King, that a fox and a wolf once cohabited in the same
den, harbouring therein together by day and resorting thither by
night; but the wolf was cruel and oppressive to the fox. They
abode thus awhile, till it so befel that the fox exhorted the
wolf to use gentle dealing and leave off his ill deeds, saying,
"If thou persist in thine arrogance, belike Allah will give the
son of Adam power over thee, for he is past master in guile and
wile; and by his artifice he bringeth down the birds from the
firmament and he haleth the mighty fish forth of the
flood-waters: and he cutteth the mountain and transporteth it
from place to place. All this is of his craft and wiliness:
wherefore do thou betake thyself to equity and fair dealing and
leave frowardness and tyranny; and thou shalt fare all the better
for it." But the wolf would not accept his counsel and answered
him roughly, saying, "What right hast thou to speak of matters of
weight and importance?" And he dealt the fox a cuff that laid him
senseless; but, when he revived, he smiled in the wolf's face
and, excusing himself for his unseemly speech, repeated these two
couplets,

"If any sin I sinned, or did I aught *
     In love of you, which hateful mischief wrought;
My sin I sore repent and pardon sue; *
     So give the sinner gift of pardon sought."

The wolf accepted his excuse and held his hand from further
ill-treatment, saying, "Speak not of whatso concerneth thee not,
lest thou hear what will please thee not." Answered the fox, "To
hear is to obey!"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Forty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth the
wolf to the fox, "Speak not of whatso concerneth thee not, lest
thou hear what will please thee not!" Answered the fox, "To hear
is to obey! I will abstain henceforth from what pleaseth thee
not; for the sage saith, 'Have a care that thou speak not of that
whereof thou art not asked; leave that which concerneth thee not
for that which concerneth thee, and by no means lavish good
counsel on the wrongous, for they will repay it to thee with
wrong.'" And reflecting on the words of the wolf he smiled in his
face, but in his heart he meditated treachery against him and
privily said, "There is no help but that I compass the
destruction of this wolf." So he bore with his injurious usage,
saying to himself, "Verily insolence and evil-speaking are causes
of perdition and cast into confusion, and it is said, 'The
insolent is shent and the ignorant doth repent; and whose
feareth, to him safety is sent': moderation marketh the noble and
gentle manners are of gains the grandest. It behoveth me to
dissemble with this tyrant and needs must he be cast down." Then
quoth he to the wolf, "Verily, the Lord pardoneth his erring
servant and relenteth towards him, if he confess his offences;
and I am a weak slave and have offended in presuming to counsel
thee. If thou knewest the pain that befel me by thy buffet, thou
wouldst ken that even the elephant could not stand against it nor
endure it: but I complain not of this blow's hurt, because of the
joy and gladness that hath betided me through it; for though it
was to me exceeding sore yet was its issue of the happiest. And
with sooth saith the sage, 'The blow of the teacher is at first
right hurtful, but the end of it is sweeter than strained
honey.'" Quoth the wolf, "I pardon thine offence and I cancel thy
fault; but beware of my force and avow thyself my thrall; for
thou hast learned my severity unto him who showeth his
hostility!" Thereupon the fox prostrated himself before the wolf,
saying, "Allah lengthen thy life and mayst thou never cease to
overthrow thy foes!" And he stinted not to fear the wolf and to
wheedle him and dissemble with him. Now it came to pass that one
day, the fox went to a vineyard and saw a breach in its walls;
but he mistrusted it and said to himself, "Verily, for this
breach there must be some cause and the old saw saith, 'Whoso
seeth a cleft in the earth and shunneth it not and is not wary in
approaching it, the same is self-deluded and exposeth himself to
danger and destruction.' Indeed, it is well known that some folk
make the figure of a fox in their vineyards; nay, they even set
before the semblance grapes in plates, that foxes may see it and
come to it and fall into perdition. In very sooth I regard this
breach as a snare and the proverb saith, 'Caution is one half of
cleverness.' Now prudence requireth that I examine this breach
and see if there be aught therein which may lead to perdition;
and coveting shall not make me cast myself into destruction." So
he went up to the hole and walked round it right warily, and lo!
it was a deep pit, which the owner of the vineyard had dug to
trap therein the wild beasts which laid waste his vines. Then he
said to himself, "Thou hast gained, for that thou hast
refrained!"; and he looked and saw that the hole was lightly
covered with dust and matting. So he drew back from it saying,
"Praised be Allah that I was wary of it! I hope that my enemy,
the wolf, who maketh my life miserable, will fall into it; so
will the vineyard be left to me and I shall enjoy it alone and
dwell therein at peace." Saying thus, he shook his head and
laughed a loud laugh and began versifying,

     "Would Heaven I saw at this hour *
          The Wolf fallen down in this well,
     He who anguisht my heart for so long, *
          And garred me drain eisel and fel!
     Heaven grant after this I may live *
          Free of Wolf for long fortunate spell
     When I've rid grapes and vineyard of him, *
          And in bunch-spoiling happily dwell."

His verse being finished he returned in haste to the wolf and
said to him, "Allah hath made plain for thee the way into the
vineyard without toil and moil. This is of thine auspicious
fortune; so good luck to thee and mayest thou enjoy the plentiful
plunder and the profuse provaunt which Allah hath opened up to
thee without trouble!" Asked the wolf, "What proof hast thou of
what thou assertest?": and the fox answered, "I went up to the
vineyard and found that the owner was dead, having been torn to
pieces by wolves: so I entered the orchard and saw the fruit
shining upon the trees." The wolf doubted not the fox's report
and his gluttony gat hold of him; so he arose and repaired to the
cleft, for that greed blinded him; whilst the fox falling behind
him lay as one dead, quoting to the case the following couplet,

"For Layla's [FN#151] favour dost thou greed? But, bear in mind *
     Greed is a yoke of harmful weight on neck of man."

And when the wolf had reached the breach the fox said, "Enter the
vineyard: thou art spared the trouble of climbing a ladder, for
the garden-wall is broken down, and with Allah it resteth to
fulfil the benefit." So the wolf went on walking and thought to
enter the vineyard; but when he came to the middle of the
pit-covering he fell through; whereupon the fox shook for joy and
gladness; his care and concern left him and he sang out for
delight and improvised these couplets,

     "Fortune had mercy on the soul of me, *
          And for my torments now shows clemency, 
     Granting whatever gift my heart desired, *
          And far removing what I feared to see: 
     I will, good sooth, excuse her all her sins *
          She sinned in days gone by and much sinned she: 
     Yea, her injustice she hath shown in this, *
          She whitened locks that were so black of blee: 
     But now for this same wolf escape there's none, *
          Of death and doom he hath full certainty. 
     Then all the vineyard comes beneath my rule, *
          I'll brook no partner who's so fond a fool."

Then the fox looked into the cleft and, seeing the wolf weeping
in repentance and sorrow for himself, wept with him; whereupon
the wolf raised his head to him and asked, "Is it of pity for me
thou weepest, O Father of the Fortlet [FN#152]?" Answered the fox,
"No, by Him who cast thee into this pit! I weep for the length of
thy past life and for regret that thou didst not fall into the
pit before this day; for hadst thou done so before I foregathered
with thee, I had rested and enjoyed repose: but thou wast spared
till the fulfilment of thine allotted term and thy destined
time." Then the wolf said to him as one jesting, "O evil-doer, go
to my mother and tell her what hath befallen me; haply she may
devise some device for my release." Replied the fox, "Of a truth
thou hast been brought to destruction by the excess of thy greed
and thine exceeding gluttony, since thou art fallen into a pit
whence thou wilt never escape. Knowest thou not the common
proverb, O thou witless wolf, 'Whoso taketh no thought as to how
things end, him shall Fate never befriend nor shall he safe from
perils wend." "O Reynard," quoth the wolf, "thou was wont to show
me fondness and covet my friendliness and fear the greatness of
my strength. Hate me not rancorously because of that I did with
thee; for he who hath power and forgiveth, his reward Allah
giveth; even as saith the poet,

     'Sow kindness-seed in the unfittest stead; *
          'Twill not be wasted whereso thou shalt sow: 
     For kindness albe buried long, yet none *
          Shall reap the crop save sower who garred it grow.'"

Rejoined the fox, "O witlessest of beasts of prey and stupidest
of the wild brutes which the wolds overstray! Hast thou forgotten
thine arrogance and insolence and tyranny, and thy disregarding
the due of goodfellowship and thy refusing to be advised by what
the poet saith?

     'Wrong not thy neighbour e'en if thou have power; *
          The wronger alway vengeance-harvest reaps: 
     Thine eyes shall sleep, while bides the wronged on wake *
          A-cursing thee; and Allah's eye ne'er sleeps.'"

"O Abu 'l-Hosayn," replied the wolf, "twit me not with my past
sins; for forgiveness is expected of the generous and doing kind
deeds is the truest of treasures. How well saith the poet,

     'Haste to do kindness while thou hast much power, *
          For at all seasons thou hast not such power.'"

And he ceased not to humble himself before the fox and say,
"Haply, thou canst do somewhat to deliver me from destruction."
Replied the fox, "O thou wolf, thou witless, deluded, deceitful
trickster! hope not for deliverance, for this is but the just
reward of thy foul dealing and its due retaliation." Then he
laughed with chops wide open and repeated these two couplets,

     "No longer beguile me, *
          Thou'lt fail of thy will! 
     What can't be thou seekest; *
          Thou hast sown so reap Ill!"

Quoth the wolf, "O gentlest of ravenous beasts, I fain hold thee
too faithful to leave me in this pit." Then he wept and
complained and, with tears streaming from his eyes, recited these
two couplets,

     "O thou whose favours have been out of compt, *
          Whose gifts are more than may be numbered! 
     Never mischance befel me yet from time *
          But that I found thy hand right fain to aid."

"O thou ninny foe," quoth the fox, "how art thou reduced to
humiliation and prostration and abjection and submission, after
insolence and pride and tyranny and arrogance! Verily, I kept
company with thee only for fear of thy fury and I cajoled thee
without one hope of fair treatment from thee: but now trembling
is come upon thee and vengeance hath overtaken thee." And he
repeated these two couplets,

     "O thou who seekest innocence to 'guile, *
          Thou'rt caught in trap of thine intentions vile: 
     Now drain the draught of shamefullest mischance, *
          And be with other wolves cut off, thou scroyle!"

Replied the wolf, "O thou clement one, speak not with the tongue
of enemies nor look with their eyes; but fulfil the covenant of
fellowship with me, ere the time of applying remedy cease to be.
Rise and make ready to get me a rope and tie one end of it to a
tree; then let the other down to me, that I may lay hold of it,
so haply I shall from this my strait win free, and I will give
thee all my hand possesseth of wealth and fee." Quoth the fox,
"Thou persistest in conversation concerning what will not procure
thy liberation. Hope not for this, for thou shalt never, never
get of me wherewithal to set thee at liberty; but call to mind
thy past misdeeds and the craft and perfidy thou didst imagine
against me and bethink thee how near thou art to being stoned to
death. For know that thy soul is about the world to quit and
cease in it and depart from it; so shalt thou to destruction hie
and ill is the abiding-place thou shalt aby!" [FN#153] Rejoined
the wolf, "O Father of the Fortlet, hasten to return to amity and
persist not in this rancorous enmity. Know that whoso from ruin
saveth a soul, is as if he had quickened it and made it whole;
and whoso saveth a soul alive, is as if he had saved all
mankind. [FN#154] Follow not frowardness, for the wise forbid it:
and it were most manifest frowardness to leave me in this pit
draining the agony of death and dight to look upon mine own doom,
whenas it lieth in thy power to deliver me from my stowre. So do
thy best to release me and deal with me benevolently." Answered
the fox, "O thou base and barbarous wretch, I compare thee,
because of the fairness of thy professions and expressions, and
the foulness of thy intentions and thy inventions to the Falcon
and the Partridge." Asked the wolf, "How so?"; and the fox began
to tell




The Tale of the Falcon [FN#155] and the Partridge. [FN#156]



Once upon a time I entered a vineyard to eat of its grapes; and,
whilst so doing behold, I saw a falcon stoop upon a partridge and
seize him; but the partridge escaped from the seizer and,
entering his nest, hid himself there. The falcon followed apace
and called out to him, saying, "O imbecile, I saw thee
an-hungered in the wold and took pity on thee; so I picked up for
thee some grain and took hold of thee that thou mightest eat; but
thou fleddest from me; and I wot not the cause of thy flight,
except it were to put upon me a slight. Come out, then, and take
the grain I have brought thee to eat and much good may it do
thee, and with thy health agree." When the partridge heard these
words, he believed and came out to him, whereupon the falcon
struck his talons into him and seized him. Cried the partridge,
"Is this that which thou toldest me thou hadst brought me from
the wold, and whereof thou badest me eat, saying, 'Much good may
it do thee, and with thy health agree?' Thou hast lied to me, and
may Allah cause what thou eatest of my flesh to be a killing
poison in thy maw!" So when the falcon had eaten the partridge,
his feathers fell off and his strength failed and he died on the
spot. "Know, then, O wolf!" (pursued the fox), "that he who
diggeth for his brother a pit himself soon falleth into it, and
thou first deceivedst me in mode unfit." Quoth the wolf, "Spare
me this discourse nor saws and tales enforce, and remind me not
of my former ill course, for sufficeth me the sorry plight I
endure perforce, seeing that I am fallen into a place, in which
even my foe would pity me, much more a true friend. Rather find
some trick to deliver me and be thou thereby my saviour. If this
cause thee trouble, remember that a true friend will undertake
the sorest travail for his true friend's sake and will risk his
life to deliver him from evil; and indeed it hath been said, 'A
leal friend is better than a real brother.' So if thou stir
thyself to save me and I be saved, I will forsure gather thee
such store as shall be a provision for thee against want however
sore; and truly I will teach thee rare tricks whereby to open
whatso bounteous vineyards thou please and strip the fruit-laden
trees." Rejoined the fox, laughing, "How excellent is what the
learned say of him who aboundeth in ignorance like unto thee!"
Asked the wolf, "What do the wise men say?" And the fox answered,
"They have observed that the gross of body are gross of mind, far
from intelligence and nigh unto ignorance. As for thy saying, O
thou stupid, cunning idiot! that a true friend should undertake
sore travail for his true friend's sake, it is sooth as thou
sayest, but tell me, of thine ignorance and poverty of
intelligence, how can I be a true friend to thee, considering thy
treachery. Dost thou count me thy true friend? Nay, I am thy foe
who joyeth in thy woe; and couldst thou trow it, this word were
sorer to thee than slaughter by shot of shaft. As for thy promise
to provide me a store against want however sore and teach me
tricks, to plunder whatso bounteous vineyards I please, and spoil
fruit-laden trees, how cometh it, O guileful traitor, that thou
knowest not a wile to save thyself from destruction? How far art
thou from profiting thyself and how far am I from accepting thy
counsel! If thou have any tricks, make shift for thyself to save
thee from the risk, wherefrom I pray Allah to make thine escape
far distant! So look, O fool, if there be any trick with thee;
and therewith save thyself from death ere thou lavish instruction
upon thy neighbours. But thou art like a certain man attacked by
a disease, who went to another diseased with the same disease,
and said to him, 'Shall I heal thee of thy disease?' Replied the
sick man, 'Why dost thou not begin by healing thyself?' So he
left him and went his way. And thou, O ignorant wolf, art like
this; so stay where thou art and under what hath befallen thee be
of good heart!" When the wolf heard what the fox said, he knew
that from him he had no hope of favour; so he wept for himself,
saying, "Verily, I have been heedless of my weal; but if Allah
deliver me from this ill I will assuredly repent of my arrogance
towards those who are weaker than I, and will wear
woollens [FN#157] and go upon the mountains, celebrating the
praises of Almighty Allah and fearing His punishment. And I will
withdraw from the company of other wild beasts and forsure will I
feed the poor fighters for the Faith." Then he wept and wailed,
till the heart of the fox softened when he heard his humble words
and his professions of penitence for his past insolence and
arrogance. So he took pity upon him and sprang up joyfully and,
going to the brink of the breach, squatted down on his hind
quarters and let his tail hang in the hole; whereupon the wolf
arose and putting out his paw, pulled the fox's tail, so that he
fell down in the pit with him. Then said the wolf, "O fox of
little mercy, why didst thou exult in my misery, thou that wast
my companion and under my dominion? Now thou art fallen into the
pit with me and retribution hath soon overtaken thee. Verily, the
sages have said, 'If one of you reproach his brother with sucking
the dugs of a bitch, he also shall suck her.' And how well quoth
the poet,

     'When Fortune weighs heavy on some of us, *
          And makes camel kneel by some other one, [FN#158] 
     Say to those who rejoice in our ills: --Awake! *
          The rejoicer shall suffer as we have done!'

And death in company is the best of things; [FN#159] wherefore I
will certainly and assuredly hasten to slay thee ere thou see me
slain." Said the fox to himself, "Ah! Ah! I am fallen into the
snare with this tyrant, and my case calleth for the use of craft
and cunning; for indeed it is said that a woman fashioneth her
jewellery for the day of display, and quoth the proverb, 'I have
not kept thee, O my tear, save for the time when distress draweth
near.' And unless I make haste to circumvent this prepotent beast
I am lost without recourse; and how well saith the poet,

     'Make thy game by guile, for thou'rt born in a Time *
          Whose sons are lions in forest lain; 
     And turn on the leat [FN#160] of thy knavery *
          That the mill of subsistence may grind thy grain; 
     And pluck the fruits or, if out of reach, *
          Why, cram thy maw with the grass on plain.'"

Then said the fox to the wolf, "Hasten not to slay me, for that
is not the way to pay me and thou wouldst repent it, O thou
valiant wild beast, lord of force and exceeding prowess! An thou
accord delay and consider what I shall say, thou wilt ken what
purpose I proposed; but if thou hasten to kill me it will profit
thee naught and we shall both die in this very place." Answered
the wolf "O thou wily trickster, what garreth thee hope to work
my deliverance and thine own, that thou prayest me to grant thee
delay? Speak and propound to me thy purpose." Replied the fox,
"As for the purpose I proposed, it was one which deserveth that
thou guerdon me handsomely for it; for when I heard thy promises
and thy confessions of thy past misdeeds and regrets for not
having earlier repented and done good; and when I heard thee
vowing, shouldst thou escape from this strait, to leave harming
thy fellows and others; forswear the eating of grapes and of all
manner fruits; devote thyself to humility; cut thy claws and
break thy dog-teeth; don woollens and offer thyself as an
offering to Almighty Allah, then indeed I had pity upon thee, for
true words are the best words. And although before I had been
anxious for thy destruction, whenas I heard thy repenting and thy
vows of amending should Allah vouchsafe to save thee, I felt
bound to free thee from this thy present plight. So I let down my
tail, that thou mightest grasp it and be saved. Yet wouldest thou
not quit thy wonted violence and habit of brutality; nor
soughtest thou to save thyself by fair means, but thou gavest me
a tug which I thought would sever body from soul, so that thou
and I are fallen into the same place of distress and death. And
now there is but one thing can save us and, if thou accept it of
me, we shall both escape; and after it behoveth thee to fulfil
the vows thou hast made and I will be thy veritable friend."
Asked the wolf, "What is it thou proposest for mine acceptance?"
Answered the fox, "It is that thou stand up at full height till I
come nigh on a level with the surface of the earth. Then will I
give a spring and reach the ground; and, when out of the pit, I
will bring thee what thou mayst lay hold of, and thus shalt thou
make thine escape." Rejoined the wolf, "I have no faith in thy
word, for sages have said, 'Whoso practiseth trust in the place
of hate, erreth;' and, 'Whoso trusteth in the untrustworthy is a
dupe; he who re-trieth him who hath been tried shall reap
repentance and his days shall go waste; and he who cannot
distinguish between case and case, giving each its due, and
assigneth all the weight to one side, his luck shall be little
and his miseries shall be many.' How well saith the poet,

     'Let thy thought be ill and none else but ill; *
          For suspicion is best of the worldling's skill: 
     Naught casteth a man into parlous place *
          But good opinion and (worse) good-will!'

And the saying of another,

     'Be sure all are villains and so bide safe; *
          Who lives wide awake on few Ills shall light: 
     Meet thy foe with smiles and a smooth fair brow, *
          And in heart raise a host for the battle dight!'

And that of yet another, [FN#161]

     'He thou trusted most is thy worst unfriend; *
          'Ware all and take heed with whom thou wend: 
     Fair opinion of Fortune is feeble sign; *
          So believe her ill and her Ills perpend!'"

Quoth the fox, "Verily mistrust and ill opinion of others are not
to be commended in every case; nay trust and confidence are the
characteristics of a noble nature and the issue thereof is
freedom from stress of fear. Now it behoveth thee, O thou wolf,
to devise some device for thy deliverance from this thou art in,
and our escape will be better to us both than our death: so quit
thy distrust and rancour; for if thou trust in me one of two
things will happen; either I shall bring thee something whereof
to lay hold and escape from this case, or I shall abandon thee to
thy doom. But this thing may not be, for I am not safe from
falling into some such strait as this thou art in, which, indeed,
would be fitting punishment of perfidy. Of a truth the adage
saith, 'Faith is fair and faithlessness is foul.' [FN#162] So it
behoveth thee to trust in me, for I am not ignorant of the haps
and mishaps of the world; and delay not to contrive some device
for our deliverance, as the case is too close to allow further
talk." Replied the wolf, "For all my want of confidence in thy
fidelity, verily I knew what was in thy mind and that thou wast
moved to deliver me whenas thou heardest my repentance, and I
said to myself, 'If what he asserteth be true, he will have
repaired the ill he did; and if false, it resteth with the Lord
to requite him.' So, look'ee, I have accepted thy proposal and,
if thou betray me, may thy traitorous deed be the cause of thy
destruction!" Then the wolf stood bolt upright in the pit and,
taking the fox upon his shoulders, raised him to the level of the
ground, whereupon Reynard gave a spring from his back and lighted
on the surface of the earth. When he found himself safely out of
the cleft he fell down senseless and the wolf said to him, "O my
friend! neglect not my case and delay not to deliver me." The fox
laughed with a loud haw-haw and replied, "O dupe, naught threw me
into thy hands save my laughing at thee and making mock of thee;
for in good sooth when I heard thee profess repentance, mirth and
gladness seized me and I frisked about and made merry and danced,
so that my tail hung low into the pit and thou caughtest hold of
it and draggedst me down with thee. And the end was that Allah
Almighty delivered me from thy power. Then why should I be other
than a helper in thy destruction, seeing that thou art of Satan's
host? I dreamt yesterday that I danced at thy wedding and I told
my dream to an interpreter who said to me, 'Verily thou shalt
fall into imminent deadly danger and thou shalt escape
therefrom.' So now I know that my falling into thy hand and my
escape are the fulfillment of my dream, and thou, O imbecile,
knowest me for thy foe; so how couldest thou, of thine ignorance
and unintelligence, nurse desire of deliverance at my hands,
after all thou hast heard of harsh words from me; and wherefore
should I attempt thy salvation whenas the sages have said, 'In
the death of the wicked is rest for mankind and a purge for the
earth'? But, were it not that I fear to bear more affliction by
keeping faith with thee than the sufferings which follow perfidy,
I had done mine endeavour to save thee." When the wolf heard
this, he bit his forehand for repentance. --And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the One Hundred and Fiftieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
wolf heard the fox's words he bit his forehand for repentance.
Then he gave the fox fair words, but this availed naught and he
was at his wits' end for what to do; so he said to him in soft,
low accents, "Verily, you tribe of foxes are the most pleasant
people in point of tongue and the subtlest in jest, and this is
but a joke of thine; but all times are not good for funning and
jesting." The fox replied, "O ignoramus, in good sooth jesting
hath a limit which the jester must not overpass; and deem not
that Allah will again give thee possession of me after having
once delivered me from thy hand." Quoth the wolf, "It behoveth
thee to compass my release, by reason of our brotherhood and good
fellowship; and, if thou release me, I will assuredly make fair
thy recompense." Quoth the fox, "Wise men say, 'Take not to
brother the wicked fool, for he will disgrace thee in lieu of
gracing thee; nor take to brother the liar for, if thou do good,
he will conceal it; and if thou do ill he will reveal it.' And
again, the sages have said, 'There is help for everything but
death: all may be warded off, except Fate.' As for the reward
thou declarest to be my due from thee, I compare thee herein with
the serpent which fled from the charmer. [FN#163] A man saw her
affrighted and said to her, 'What aileth thee, O thou serpent?'
Replied she, 'I am fleeing from the snake-charmer, for he seeketh
to trap me and, if thou wilt save me and hide me with thee, I
will make fair thy reward and do thee all manner of kindness.' So
he took her, incited thereto by lust for the recompense and eager
to find favour with Heaven, and set her in his breastpocket. Now
when the charmer had passed and had wended his way and the
serpent had no longer any cause to fear, he said to her, 'Where
is the reward thou didst promise me? Behold, I have saved thee
from that thou fearedest and soughtest to fly.' Replied she,
'Tell me in what limb or in what place shall I strike thee with
my fangs, for thou knowest we exceed not that recompense.' So
saying, she gave him a bite whereof he died. And I liken thee, O
dullard, to the serpent in her dealings with that man. Hast thou
not heard what the poet saith?

     'Trust not to man when thou hast raised his spleen *
          And wrath, nor that 'twill cool do thou misween: 
     Smooth feels the viper to the touch and glides *
          With grace, yet hides she deadliest venene.'"

Quoth the wolf, "O thou glib of gab and fair of face, ignore not
my case and men's fear of me; and well thou weetest how I assault
the strongly walled place and uproot the vines from base.
Wherefore, do as I bid thee, and stand before me even as the
thrall standeth before his lord." Quoth the fox, "O stupid
dullard who seekest a vain thing, I marvel at thy folly and thy
front of brass in that thou biddest me serve thee and stand up
before thee as I were a slave bought with thy silver; but soon
shalt thou see what is in store for thee, in the way of cracking
thy sconce with stones and knocking out thy traitorous
dog-teeth." So saying the fox clomb a hill overlooking the
vineyard and standing there, shouted out to the vintagers; nor
did he give over shouting till he woke them and they, seeing him,
all came up to him in haste. He stood his ground till they drew
near him and close to the pit wherein was the wolf; and then he
turned and fled. So the folk looked into the cleft and, spying
the wolf, set to pelting him with heavy stones, and they stinted
not smiting him with stones and sticks, and stabbing him with
spears, till they killed him and went away. Thereupon the fox
returned to that cleft and, standing over the spot where his foe
had been slain, saw the wolf dead: so he wagged his head for very
joyance and began to recite these couplets,

     "Fate the Wolf's soul snatched up from wordly stead; *
          Far be from bliss his soul that perished! 
     Abu Sirhan! [FN#164] how sore thou sought'st my death; *
          Thou, burnt this day in fire of sorrow dread: 
     Thou'rt fallen into pit, where all who fall *
          Are blown by Death-blast down among the dead."

Thenceforward the aforesaid fox abode alone in the vineyard unto
the hour of his death secure and fearing no hurt. And such are
the adventures of the wolf and the fox. But men also tell a




          TALE OF THE MOUSE AND THE ICHNEUMON [FN#165]



A mouse and an ichneumon once dwelt in the house of a peasant who
was very poor; and when one of his friends sickened, the doctor
prescribed him husked sesame.  So the hind sought of one of his
comrades sesame to be husked by way of healing the sick man; and,
when a measure thereof was given to him, he carried it home to
his wife and bade her dress it.  So she steeped it and husked it
and spread it out to dry.  Now when the ichneumon saw the grain,
she went up to it and fell to carrying it away to her hole, and
she toiled all day, till she had borne off the most of it. 
Presently, in came the peasant's wife and, seeing much of the
grain gone, stood awhile wondering; after which she sat down to
watch and find out who might be the intruder and make him account
for her loss.  After a while, out crept the ichneumon to carry
off the grain as was her wont, but spying the woman seated there,
knew that she was on the watch for her and said in her mind,
"Verily, this affair is like to end blameably; and sore I fear me
this woman is on the look-out for me, and Fortune is no friend to
who attend not to issue and end: so there is no help for it but
that I do a fair deed, whereby I may manifest my innocence and
wash out all the ill-doings I have done."  So saying, she began
to take the sesame out of her hole and carry it forth and lay it
back upon the rest.  The woman stood by and, seeing the ichneumon
do thus, said to herself, "Verily this is not the cause of our
loss, for she bringeth it back from the hole of him who stole it
and returneth it to its place; and of a truth she hath done us a
kindness in restoring us the sesame, and the reward of those who
do us good is that we do them the like good.  It is clear that it
is not she who stole the grain; but I will not cease my watching
till he fall into my hands and I find out who is the thief."  The
ichneumon guess what was in her mind, so she went to the mouse
and said to her, "O my sister, there is no good in one who
observeth not the claims of neighborship and who showeth no
constancy in friendship."  The mouse replied, "Even so, O my
friend, and I delight in thee and in they neighborhood; but what
be the motive of this speech?"  Quoth the ichneumon, "The house-
master hath brought home sesame and hath eaten his fill of it, he
and his family, and hath left much; every living being hath eaten
of it and, if thou take of it in they turn, thou art worthier
thereof than any other."  This pleased the mouse and she squeaked
for joy and danced and frisked her ears and tail, and greed for
the grain deluded her; so she rose at once and issuing forth of
her home, saw the sesame husked and dry, shining with whiteness,
and the woman sitting at watch and ward.  The mouse, taking no
thought to the issue of the affair (for the woman had armed
herself with a cudgel), and unable to contain herself, ran up to
the sesame and began turning it over and eating of it; whereupon
the woman smote her with that club and cleft her head: so the
cause of her destruction were her greed and heedlessness of
consequences.  Then said the Sultan, "O Shahrazad, by Allah! this
be a goodly parable!  Say me, hast thou any story bearing on the
beauty of true friendship and the observance of its duty in time
of distress and rescuing from destruction?"  Answered she:--Yes,
it hath reached me that they tell a tale of




                  THE CAT [FN#166] AND THE CROW



Once upon a time, a crow and a cat lived in brotherhood; and one
day as they were together under a tree, behold, they spied a
leopard making towards them, and they were not aware of his
approach till he was close upon them.  The crow at once flew up
to the tree-top; but the cat abode confounded and said to the
crow, "O my friend, hast thou no device to save me, even as all
my hope is in thee?"  Replied the crow, "Of very truth it
behoveth brethren, in case of need, to cast about for a device
when peril overtaketh them, and how well saith the poet,

     'A friend in need is he who, ever true, *
     For they well-doing would himself undo:
     One who when Fortune gars us parting rue *
     Victimeth self reunion to renew.'"

Now hard by that tree were shepherds with their dogs; so the crow
flew towards them and smote the face of the earth with his wings,
cawing and crying out.  Furthermore he went up to one of the dogs
and flapped his wings in his face and flew up a little way,
whilst the dog ran after him thinking to catch him.  Presently,
one of the shepherds raised his head and saw the bird flying near
the ground and lighting alternately; so he followed him, and the
crow ceased not flying just high enough to save himself and to
throw out the dogs; and yet tempting them to follow for the
purpose of tearing him to pieces.  But as soon as they came near
him, he would fly up a little; and so at last he brought them to
the tree, under which was the leopard.  And when the dogs saw him
they rushed upon him and he turned and fled.  Now the leopard
thought to eat the cat who was saved by the craft of his friend
the crow.  This story, O King, showeth that the friendship of the
Brothers of Purity [FN#167] delivereth and saveth from
difficulties and from falling into mortal dangers.  And they also
tell a tale of




                      THE FOX AND THE CROW



A Fox once dwelt in a cave of a certain mountain and, as often as
a cub was born to him and grew stout, he would eat the young one,
for he had died of hunger, had he instead of so doing left the
cub alive and bred it by his side and preserved and cherished his
issue.  Yet was this very grievous to him.  Now on the crest of
the same mountain a crow had made his nest, and the fox said to
himself, "I have a mind to set up a friendship with this crow and
make a comrade of him, that he may help me to my daily bread; for
he can do in such matters what I cannot."  So he drew near the
crow's home and, when he came within sound of speech, he saluted
him and said, "O my neighbour, verily a true-believer hath two
claims upon his true-believing neighbour, the right of
neighbourliness and the right of Al-Islam, our common faith; and
know, O my friend, that thou art my neighbour and thou hast a
claim upon me which it behoveth me to observe, the more that I
have long been thy neighbour.  Also, there be implanted in my
breast a store of love to thee, which biddeth me speak thee fair
and obligeth me to solicit thy brothership.  What sayest thou in
reply?"  Answered the crow, "Verily, the truest speech is the
best speech; and haply thou speakest with thy tongue that which
is not in thy heart; so I fear lest thy brotherhood be only of
the tongue, outward, and thy enmity be in the heart, inward; for
that thou art the Eater and I the Eaten, and faring apart were
apter to us than friendship and fellowship.  What, then, maketh
thee seek that which thou mayst not gain and desire what may not
be done, seeing that I be of the bird-kind and thou be of the
beast-kind?  Verily, this thy proffered brotherhood [FN#168] may
not be made, neither were it seemly to make it."  Rejoined the
fox, "Of a truth whoso knoweth the abiding-place of excellent
things, maketh better choice in what he chooseth therefrom, so
perchance he may advantage his brethren; and indeed I should love
to wone near thee and I have sued for thine intimacy, to the end
that we may help each other to our several objects; and success
shall surely wait upon our amity.  I have a many tales of the
goodliness of true friendship, which I will relate to thee if
thou wish the relating."  Answered the crow, "Thou hast my leave
to let me hear thy communication; so tell thy tale, and relate it
to me that I may hearken to it and weigh it and judge of thine
intent thereby."  Rejoined the fox, "Hear then, O my friend, that
which is told of a flea and a mouse and which beareth out what I
have said to thee."  Asked the crow, "How so?" and the fox
answered:--They tell this tale of




The Flea and the Mouse



Once upon a time a mouse dwelt in the house of a merchant who
owned much merchandise and great stories of monies.  One night, a
flea took shelter in the merchant's carpet-bed and, finding his
body soft, and being thirsty drank of his blood.  The merchant
was awakened by the smart of the bite and sitting up called to
his slave-girls and serving men.  So they hastened to him and,
tucking up their sleeves, fell to searching for the flea; but as
soon as the bloodsucker was aware of the search, he turned to
flee and coming on the mouse's home, entered it.  When the mouse
saw him, she said to him, "What bringeth thee in to me, thou who
art not of my nature nor of my kind, and who canst not be assured
of safety from violence or of not being expelled with roughness
and ill usage?"  Answered the flea, "Of a truth, I took refuge in
thy dwelling to save me from slaughter; and I have come to thee
seeking thy protection and on nowise coveting thy house; nor
shall any mischief betide thee from me to make thee leave thy
home.  Nay I hope right soon to repay thy favours to me with all
good and then shalt thou see and praise the issue of my words." 
And when the mouse heard the speech of the flea, - And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       When it was the One Hundred and Fifty-first Night

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
mouse heard the words of the flea, she said, "If the case be as
thou dost relate and describe, then be at thine ease here; for
naught shall befal thee save the rain of peace and safety; nor
shall aught betide thee but what shall joy thee and shall not
annoy thee, nor shall it annoy me.  I will lavish on thee my
affections without stint; and do not thou regret having lost the
merchant's blood nor lament for thy subsistence from him, but be
content with what sustenance thou canst obtain; for indeed that
is the safer for thee.  And I have heard, O flea, that one of the
gnomic poets saith as follows in these couplets,

'I have fared content in my solitude *
     With wate'er befel, and led life of ease,
On a water-draught and a bite of bread, *
     Coarse salt and a gown of tattered frieze:
Allah might, an He pleased, give me easiest life, *
     But with whatso pleaseth Him self I please.'"

Now when the flea heard these words of the mouse, he rejoined, "I
hearken to thy charge and I submit myself to obey thee, nor have
I power to gainsay thee, till life be fulfilled in this righteous
intention."  Replied the mouse, "Pure intention sufficeth to
sincere affection."  So the tie of love arose and was knitted
between them twain, and after this, the flea used to visit the
merchant's bed by night and not exceed in his diet, and house him
by day in the hole of the mouse.  Now it came to pass one night,
the merchant brought home great store of dinars and began to turn
them over.  When the mouse heard the chink of the coin, she put
her head out of her hole and fell to gazing at it, till the
merchant laid it under his pillow and went to sleep, when she
said to the flea, "Seest thou not the proffered occasion and the
great good fortune?  Hast thou any device to bring us to our
desire of yonder dinars?  Quoth the flea, "Verily, it is not good
that one strives for aught, unless he be able to win his will;
because, if he lack ability thereto, he falleth into that which
he should avoid and he attaineth not his wish by reason of his
weakness, albeit he use all power of cunning, like the sparrow
which picketh up grain and falleth into the net and is caught by
the fowler.  Thou hast no strength to take the dinars and to
transport them out of this house, nor have I force sufficient to
do this; I the contrary, I could not carry a single ducat of
them; so what hast thou to do with them?"  Quoth the mouse, "I
have made me for my house these seventy openings, whence I may go
out at my desire, and I have set apart a place strong and safe,
for things of price; and if thou can contrive to get the merchant
out of the house, I doubt not of success, an so be that 
Fate aid me."  Answered the flea, "I will engage to get him out
of the house for thee;" and, going to the merchant's bed, bit him
a fearful bite, such as he had never before felt, then fled to a
place of safety, where he had no fear of the man.  So the
merchant awoke and sought for the flea, but finding him not, lay
down again on his other side.  Then the flea bit him a second
time more painfully than before.  So he lost patience and,
leaving his bed, went out and lay down on the bench before his
door and slept there and woke not till the morning.  Meanwhile
the mouse came out and fell to carrying the dinars into her hole,
till she left not a single one; and when day dawned the merchant
began to suspect the folk and fancy all manner of fancies.  And
(continued the fox) know thou, O wise and experienced crow with
the clear-seeing eyes, that I tell thee this only to the intent
that thou mayst reap the recompense of thy kindness to me, even
as the mouse reaped the reward of her kindness to the flea; for
see how he repaid her and requited her with the goodliest of
requitals.  Said the crow, "It lies with the benefactor to show
benevolence or not to show it; nor is it incumbent on us to
entreat kindly one who seeketh a connection that entaileth
separation from kith and kin.  If I show thee favour who art my
foe by kind, I am the cause of cutting myself off from the world;
and thou, O fox, art full of wiles and guiles.  Now those whose
characteristics are craft and cunning, must not be trusted upon
oath; and whoso is not to be trusted upon oath, in him there is
no good faith.  The tidings lately reached me of thy treacherous
dealing with one of thy comrades, which was a wolf; and how thou
didst deceive him until thou leddest him into destruction by thy
perfidy and stratagems; and this thou diddest after he was of
thine own kind and thou hadst long consorted with him: yet didst
thou not spare him; and if thou couldst deal thus with thy fellow
which was of thine own kind, how can I have trust in they truth
and what would be thy dealing with thy foe of other kind than thy
kind?  Nor can I compare thee and me but with the saker and the
birds."  "How so?" asked the fox.  Answered the crow, they relate
this tale of 




The Saker [FN#169] and the Birds.



There was once a saker who was a cruel tyrant"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.


       When it was the One Hundred and Fifty-second Night

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the crow
pursued, "They relate that there was once a saker who was a cruel
tyrant in the days of his youth, so that the raveners of the air
and the scavengers of the earth feared him, none being safe from
his mischief; and many were the haps and mishaps of his tyranny
and his violence, for this saker was ever in the habit of
oppressing and injuring all the other birds.  As the years passed
over him, he grew feeble and his force failed him, so that he was
often famished; but his cunning waxed stronger with the waning of
his strength and redoubled in his endeavour and determined to be
present at the general assembly of the birds, that he might eat
of their orts and leavings; so in this manner he fed by fraud
instead of feeding by fierceness and force.  And out, O fox, art
like this:  if thy might fail thee, thy sleight faileth thee not;
and I doubt not that thy seeking my society is a fraud to get thy
food; but I am none of those who fall to thee and put fist into
thy fist; [FN#170] for that Allah hath vouchsafed force to my
wings and caution to my mind and sharp sight to my eyes; and I
know that whoso apeth a stronger than he, wearieth himself and
haply cometh to ruin.  Wherefore I fear for thee lest, if thou
ape a stronger than thyself, there befal thee what befel the
sparrow."  Asked the fox, "What befel the sparrow?"  Allah upon
thee, tell me his tale."  And the crow began to relate the story
of




The Sparrow and the Eagle



I have heard that a sparrow was once flitting over a sheep-fold,
when he looked at it carefully and behold, he saw a great eagle
swoop down upon a newly weaned lamb and carry it off in his claws
and fly away.  Thereupon the sparrow clapped his wings and said,
"I will do even as this one did;" and he waxed proud in his own
conceit and mimicked a greater than he.  So he flew down
forthright and lighted on the back of a fat ram with a thick
fleece that was become matted by his lying in his dung and stale
till it was like woollen felt.  As soon as the sparrow pounced
upon the sheep's back he flapped his wings to fly away, but his
feet became tangled in the wool and, however hard he tried, he
could not set himself free.  While all this was doing the
shepherd was looking on, having seen what happened first with the
eagle and afterwards with the sparrow; so he came up to the wee
birdie in a rage and seized him.  Then he plucked out his wing-
feathers and, tying his feet with a twine, carried him to his
children and threw him to them.  "What is this?" asked one of
them; and he answered, "This is he that aped a greater than
himself and came to grief."  "Now thou, O fox, art like this and
I would have thee beware of aping a greater than thou, lest thou
perish.  This is all I have to say to thee; so fare from me in
peace!"  When the fox despaired of the crow's friendship, he
turned away, groaning for sorrow and gnashing teeth upon teeth in
his disappointment; and the crow, hearing the sound of weeping
and seeing his grief and profound melancholy, said to him, "O
fox, what dole and dolour make thee gnash thy canines?"  Answered
the fox, "I gnash my canines because I find thee a greater rascal
than myself;" and so saying he made off to his house and ceased
not to fare until he reached his home.  Quoth the Sultan, "O
Shahrazad, how excellent are these thy stories, and how
delightsome!  Hast thou more of such edifying tales?"  Answered
she:--They tell this legend concerning




               THE HEDGEHOG AND THE WOOD-PIGEONS



A hedgehog once too up his abode by the side of a date-palm,
whereon roosted a wood-pigeon and his wife that had built their
next there and lived a life of ease and enjoyment.  So he said to
himself, "This pigeon-pair eateth of the fruit of the date tree
and I have no means of getting at it; but needs must I find some
fashion of tricking them.  Upon this he dug a hole at the foot of
the palm tree and took up his lodgings there, he and his wife;
moreover, he built an oratory beside the hole and went into
retreat there and made a show of devotion and edification and
renunciation of the world.  The male pigeon saw him praying and
worshipping, and his heart was softened towards him for his
excess of devoutness; so he said to him, "How many years hast
thou been thus?"  Replied the hedgehog, "During the last thirty
years."  "What is thy food?"  "That which falleth from the palm-
tree."  "And what is thy clothing?"  "Prickles! and I profit by
their roughness."  "And why hast thou chosen this for place
rather than another?"  "I chose it and preferred it to all others
that I might guide the erring into the right way and teach the
ignorant!"  "I had fancied thy case," quoth the wood-pigeon,
"other than this, but now I yearn for that which is with thee." 
Quoth the hedgehog, "I fear lest thy deed contradict thy word and
thou be even as the husbandman who, when the seed-season came,
neglected to sow, saying, 'Verily I dread lest the days bring me
not to my desire and by making hast to sow I shall only waste my
substance!'  When harvest-time came and he saw the folk earing
their crops, he repented him of what he had lost by his tardiness
and he died of chagrin and vexation."  Asked the wood-pigeon,
"What then shall I do that I may be freed from the bonds of the
world and cut myself loose from all things save the service of my
Lord?"  Answered the hedgehog, "Betake thee to preparing for the
next world and content thyself with a pittance of provision." 
Quoth the pigeon, "How can I do this, I that am a bird and unable
to go beyond the date-tree whereon is my daily bread?  And even
could I do so, I know of no other place wherein I may wone." 
Quoth the hedgehog, "Thou canst shake down of the fruit of the
date-tree what shall suffice thee and thy wife for a year's
provaunt; then do ye take up your abode in a nest under the
trunk, that ye may prayerfully seek to be guided in the right
way, and then turn thou to what thou hast shaken down and
transport it all to thy home and store it up against what time
the dates fail; and when the fruits are spent and the delay is
longsome upon you, address thyself to total abstinence." 
Exclaimed the pigeon, "Allah requite thee with good for the
righteous intention wherewith thou hast reminded me of the world
to come and hast directed me into the right way!"  Then he and
his wife worked hard at knocking down the dates, till nothing was
left on the palm-tree, whilst the hedgehog, finding whereof to
eat, rejoiced and filled his den with the fruit, storing it up
for his subsistence and saying in his mind, "When the pigeon and
his wife have need of their provision, they will seek it of me
and covet what I have, relying upon thy devoutness and
abstinence; and, from what they have heard of my counsels and
admonitions, they will draw near unto me.  Then will I make them
my prey and eat them, after which I shall have the place and all
that drops from the date-tree to suffice me." presently, having
shaken down the fruits, the pigeon and his wife descended from
the tree-top and finding that the hedgehog had removed all the
dates to his own place, said to him, "O hedgehog! thou pious
preacher and of good counsel, we can find no sign of the dates
and know not on what else we shall feed."  Replied the hedgehog,
"Probably the winds have carried them away; but the turning from
the provisions to the Provider is of the essence of salvation,
and He who the mouth-corners cleft, the mouth without victual
hath never left."  And he gave not over improving the occasion to
them on this wise, and making a show of piety and cozening them
with fine words and false until they put faith in him and
accepted him and entered his den and had no suspicion of his
deceit.  Thereupon he sprang to the door and gnashed his teeth,
and the wood-pigeon, seeing his perfidy manifested, said to him,
"What hath to-night to do with yester-night?  Knowest thou not
that there is a Helper for the oppressed?  Beware of craft and
treachery, lest that mishap befal thee which befel the sharpers
who plotted against the merchant."  "What was that?" asked the
hedgehog.  Answered the pigeon:--I have heard tell this tale of 




The Merchant and the Two Shapers



In a city called Sindah there was once a very wealthy merchant,
who made ready his camel-loads and equipped himself with goods
and set out with his outfit for such a city, purposing to sell it
there.  Now he was followed by two sharpers, who had made up into
bales what merchandise they could get; and, giving out to the
merchant that they also were merchants, wended with him by the
way.  So halting at the first halting-place they agreed to play
him false and take all he had; but at the same time, each
inwardly plotted foul play to the other, saying in his mind, "If
I can cheat my comrade, times will go well with me and I shall
have all these goods for myself."  So after planning this
perfidy, one of them took food and putting therein poison,
brought it to his fellow; the other did the same and they both
ate of the poisoned mess and they both died.  Now they had been
sitting with the merchant; so when they left him and were long
absent from him, he sought for tidings of them and found the
twain lying dead; whereby he knew that they were sharpers who had
plotted to play him foul, but their foul play had recoiled upon
themselves.  So the merchant was preserved and took what they
had.  Then quoth the Sultan, "O Shahrazad, verily thou hast
aroused me to all whereof I was negligent!  So continue to edify
me with these fables."  Quoth she:--It hath reached me, O King,
that men tell this tale of




                THE THIEF AND HIS MONKEY [FN#171]



A certain man had a monkey and that man was a thief, who never
entered any of the street-markets of the city wherein he dwelt,
but he made off with great profit.  Now it came to pass one day
that he saw a man offering for sale worn clothes, and he went
calling them in the market, but none bid for them and all to whom
he showed them refused to buy of him.  Presently the thief who
had the monkey saw the man with the ragged clothes set them in a
wrapper and sit down to rest for weariness; so he made the ape
sport before him to catch his eye and, whilst he was busy gazing
at it, stole the parcel from him.  Then he took the ape and made
off to a lonely place, where he opened the wrapper and, taking
out the old clothes, folded them in a piece of costly stuff. 
This he carried to another bazar and exposed for sale together
with what was therein, making it a condition that it should not
be opened, and tempting the folk with the lowness of the price he
set on it.  A certain man saw the wrapper and its beauty pleased
him; so he bought the parcel on these terms and carried it home,
doubting not that he had done well.  When his wife saw it she
asked, "What is this?" and he answered, "It is costly stuff,
which I have bought at lowest price, meaning to sell it again and
take the profit."  Rejoined she, "O dupe, would this stuff be
sold under its value, unless it had been stolen?  Dost thou not
know that whoso buyeth aught without examining it, falleth into
error and becometh like unto the weaver?"  Quoth he, "And what is
the story of the weaver?"; and quoth she:--I have heard this take
of 




The Foolish Weaver



There was once in a certain village a weaver who worked hard but
could not earn his living save by overwork.  Now it chanced that
one of the richards of the neighbourhood made a marriage feast
and invited the folk thereto: the weaver also was present and
found the guests, who wore rich gear, served with delicate viands
and made much of by the house-master for what he saw of their
fine clothes.  So he said in his mind, "If I change this my craft
for another craft easier to compass and better considered and
more highly paid, I shall amass great store of money and I shall
buy splendid attire, so I may rise in rank and be exalted in
men's eyes and become even with these."  Presently, he beheld one
of the mountebanks, who was present at the feast, climbing up to
the top of a high and towering wall and throwing himself down to
the ground and alighting on his feet.  Whereupon the waver said
to himself, "Needs must I do as this one hath done, for surely I
shall not fail of it."  So he arose and swarmed upon the wall and
casting himself down, broke his neck against the ground and died
forthright.  "Now I tell thee this that thou sayst get thy living
by what way thou knowest and thoroughly understandest, lest
peradventure greed enter into thee and thou lust after what is
not of thy condition."  Quoth the woman's husband, "Not every
wise man is saved by his wisdom, nor is every fool lost by his
folly.  I have seen it happen to a skilful charmer, well versed
in the ways of serpents, to be struck by the fangs of a
snake [FN#172] and killed, and others prevail over serpents who
had no skill in them and no knowledge of their ways."  And he
went contrary to his wife and persisted in buying stolen goods
below their value till he fell under suspicion and perished
therefor: even as perished the sparrow in the tale of




                  THE SPARROW AND THE PEACOCK



There was once upon a time a sparrow, that used every day to
visit a certain king of the birds and ceased not to wait upon him
in the mornings and not to leave him till the evenings, being the
first to go in and the last to go out.  One day, a company of
birds chanced to assemble on a high mountain and one of them said
to another, "Verily, we are waxed many, and many are the
differences between us, and there is no help for it but we have a
king to look into our affairs; so shall we all be at one and our
differences will disappear."  Thereupon up came that sparrow and
counselled them to choose for King the peacock (that is, the
prince he used to visit).  So they chose the peacock to their
King and he, become their sovereign, bestowed largesse upon them
and made the sparrow his secretary and Prime Minister.  Now the
sparrow was wont by times to quit his assiduous serve in the
presence and look into matters in general.  So one day he
absented himself at the usual time, whereat the peacock was sore
troubled; and, while things stood thus, he returned and the
peacock said to him, "What hath delayed thee, and thou the
nearest to me of all my servants and the dearest of all my
dependents?" replied the sparrow, "I have seen a thing which is
doubtful to me and whereat I am affrighted."  Asked the peacock,
"What was it thou sawest?"; and the sparrow answered, "I saw a
man set up a net, hard by my nest, peg down its pegs, strew grain
in its midst and withdraw afar off.  And I sat watching what he
would do when behold, fate and fortune drave thither a crane and
his wife, which fell into the midst of the net and began to cry
out; whereupon the fowler rose up and took them.  This troubled
me, and such is the reason for my absence from thee, O King of
the Age, but never again will I abide in that nest for fear of
the net."  Rejoined the peacock, "Depart not thy dwelling, for
against fate and lot forethought will avail the naught."  And the
sparrow obeyed his bidding and said, "I will forthwith arm myself
with patience and forbear to depart in obedience to the King." 
So he ceased not taking care of himself, and carrying food to his
sovereign, who would eat what sufficed him and after feeding
drink his water and dismiss the sparrow.  Now one day as he was
looking into matters, lo and behold! he saw two sparrows fighting
on the ground and said in his mind, "How can I, who am the King's
Wazir, look on and see sparrows fighting in my neighbourhood?  By
Allah, I must make peace between them!"  So he flew down to
reconcile them; but the fowler cast the net over the whole number
and the sparrow happened to be in their very midst.  Then the
fowler arose and took him and gave him to his comrade, saying,
"Take care of him, " I never saw fatter or finer."  But the
sparrow said to himself, "I have fallen into that which I feared
and none but the peacock inspired me with false confidence.  It
availed me naught to beware of the stroke of fate and fortune,
since even he who taketh precaution may never flee from destiny. 
And how well said the poet in this poetry,

     "Whatso is not to be shall ne'er become; *
     No wise! and that to be must come to pass;
     Yea it shall come to pass at time ordained, *
     And th' Ignoramus [FN#173] aye shall cry 'Alas!'"

Whereupon quoth the King, "O Shahrazad, recount me other of these
tales!"; and quoth she, "I will do so during the coming night, if
life be granted to by the King whom Allah bring to honour!"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Fifty-third Night,

She said:--I will relate the




              TALE OF ALI BIN BAKKAR AND OF SHAMS
                           AL-NAHAR.



It hath reached me, O august King, that in days of yore and in
times and ages long gone before, during the Caliphate of Harun
al-Rashid, there was a merchant who named his son Abu
al-Hasan [FN#174] Ali bin Tahir; and the same was great of goods
and grace, while his son was fair of form and face and held in
favour by all folk. He used to enter the royal palace without
asking leave, for all the Caliph's concubines and slave-girls
loved him, and he was wont to be companion with Al-Rashid in his
cups and recite verses to him and tell him curious tales and
witty. Withal he sold and bought in the merchants' bazar, and
there used to sit in his shop a youth named Ali bin Bakkar, of
the sons of the Persian Kings [FN#175] who was formous of form and
symmetrical of shape and perfect of figure, with cheeks red as
roses and joined eyebrows; sweet of speech, laughing-lipped and
delighting in mirth and gaiety. Now it chanced one day, as the
two sat talking and laughing behold, there came up ten damsels
like moons, every one of them complete in beauty and loveliness,
and elegance and grace; and amongst them was a young lady riding
on a she-mule with a saddle of brocade and stirrups of gold. She
wore an outer veil of fine stuff, and her waist was girt with a
girdle of gold-embroidered silk; and she was even as saith the
poet,

     "Silky her skin and silk that zoned waist; *
          Sweet voice; words not o'er many nor too few: 
     Two eyes quoth Allah 'Be,' and they became; *
          And work like wine on hearts they make to rue: 
     O love I feel! grow greater every night: *
          O solace! Doom-day bring our interview."

And when the cortege reached Abu al-Hasan's shop, she alighted
from her mule, and sitting down on the front board, [FN#176]
saluted him, and he returned her salam. When Ali bin Bakkar saw
her, she ravished his understanding and he rose to go away; but
she said to him, "Sit in thy place. We came to thee and thou
goest away: this is not fair!" Replied he, "O my lady, by Allah,
I flee from what I see; for the tongue of the case saith,

     'She is a sun which towereth high a-sky; *
          So ease thy heart with cure by Patience lent:
     Thou to her skyey height shalt fail to fly; *
          Nor she from skyey height can make descent.'"

When she heard this, she smiled and asked Abu al-Hasan, "What is
the name of this young man?"; who answered, "He is a stranger;"
and she enquired, "What countryman is he?"; whereto the merchant
replied, "He is a descendant of the Persian Kings; his name is
Ali son of Bakkar and the stranger deserveth honour." Rejoined
she, "When my damsel comes to thee, come thou at once to us and
bring him with thee, that we may entertain him in our abode, lest
he blame us and say, 'There is no hospitality in the people of
Baghdad'; for niggardliness is the worst fault a man can have.
Thou hearest what I say to thee and, if thou disobey me, thou
wilt incur my displeasure and I will never again visit thee or
salute thee." Quoth Abu al-Hasan, "On my head and my eyes: Allah
preserve me from thy displeasure, fair lady!" Then she rose and
went her way. Such was her case; but as regards Ali bin Bakkar he
remained in a state of bewilderment. Now after an hour the damsel
came to Abu al-Hasan and said to him, "Of a truth my lady Shams
al-Nahar, the favourite of the Commander of the Faithful, Harun
al-Rashid, biddeth thee to her, thee and thy friend, my lord Ali
bin Bakkar." So he rose and, taking Ali with him, followed the
girl to the Caliph's palace, where she carried them into a
chamber and made them sit down. They talked together awhile, when
behold, trays of food were set before them, and they ate and
washed their hands. Then she brought them wine, and they drank
deep and made merry; after which she bade them rise and carried
them into another chamber, vaulted upon four columns, furnished
after the goodliest fashion with various kinds of furniture, and
adorned with decorations as it were one of the pavilions of
Paradise. They were amazed at the rarities they saw; and, as they
were enjoying a review of these marvels, suddenly up came ten
slave-girls, like moons, swaying and swimming in beauty's pride,
dazzling the sight and confounding the sprite; and they ranged
themselves in two ranks as if they were of the black-eyed Brides
of Paradise. And after a while in came other ten damsels, bearing
in their hands lutes and divers instruments of mirth and music;
and these, having saluted the two guests, sat down and fell to
tuning their lute-strings. Then they rose and standing before
them, played and sang and recited verses: and indeed each one of
them was a seduction to the servants of the Lord. Whilst they
were thus busied there entered other ten damsels like unto them,
high-bosomed maids and of an equal age, with black-eyes and
cheeks like the rose, joined eyebrows and looks languorous; a
very fascination to every faithful wight and to all who looked
upon them a delight; clad in various kinds of coloured silks,
with ornaments that amazed man's intelligence. They took up their
station at the door, and there succeeded them yet other ten
damsels even fairer than they, clad in gorgeous array, such as no
tongue can say; and they also stationed themselves by the
doorway. Then in came a band of twenty damsels and amongst them
the lady, Shams al-Nahar hight, as she were the moon among the
stars swaying from side to side, with luring gait and in beauty's
pride. And she was veiled to the middle with the luxuriance of
her locks, and clad in a robe of azure blue and a mantilla of
silk embroidered with gold and gems of price; and her waist was
girt with a zone set with various kinds of precious stones. She
ceased not to advance with her graceful and coquettish swaying,
till she came to the couch that stood at the upper end of the
chamber and seated herself thereon. But when Ali bin Bakkar saw
her, he versified with these verses,

     "Source of mine evils, truly, she alone 's, *
          Of long love-longing and my groans and moans;
     Near her I find my soul in melting mood, *
          For love of her and wasting of my bones."

And finishing his poetry he said to Abu al-Hasan, "Hadst thou
Dealt more kindly with me thou haddest forewarned me of these
things ere I came hither, that I might have made up my mind and
taken patience to support what hath befallen me." And he wept and
groaned and complained. Replied Abu al-Hasan, "O my brother, I
meant thee naught but good; but I feared to tell thee this, lest
such transport should betide thee as might hinder thee from
foregathering with her, and be a stumbling-block between thee and
her. But be of good cheer and keep thine eyes cool and
clear; [FN#177] for she to thee inclineth and to favour thee
designeth." Asked Ali bin Bakkar, "What is this young lady's
name?" Answered Abu al-Hasan, "She is hight Shams al-Nahar, one
of the favourites of the Commander of the Faithful, Harun
al-Rashid, and this is the palace of the Caliphate." Then Shams
al-Nahar sat gazing upon the charms of Ali bin Bakkar and he upon
hers, till both were engrossed with love for each other.
Presently she commanded the damsels, one and all, to be seated,
each in her rank and place, and all sat on a couch before one of
the windows, and she bade them sing; whereupon one of them took
up the lute and began caroling,

"Give thou my message twice * Bring clear reply in trice!
To thee, O Prince of Beau * -ty [FN#178] with complaint I rise:
My lord, as heart-blood dear * And Life's most precious prize!
Give me one kiss in gift * Or loan, if thou devise:
And if thou crave for more * Take all that satisfies. [FN#179]
Thou donn'st me sickness-dress * Thee with health's weed I
     bless."

Her singing charmed Ali bin Bakkar, and he said to her, "Sing me
more of the like of these verses." So she struck the strings and
began to chaunt these lines,

     "By stress of parting, O beloved one, *
          Thou mad'st these eyelids torment- race to run: 
     Oh gladness of my sight and dear desire, *
          Goal of my wishes, my religion! 
     Pity the youth whose eyne are drowned in tears *
          Of lover gone distraught and clean undone."

When she had finished her verses, Shams al-Nahar said to another
damsel, "Let us hear something from thee!" So she played a lively
measure and began these couplets,

     "His [FN#180] looks have made me drunken, not his wine; *
          His grace of gait disgraced sleep to these eyne:
     Dazed me no cup, but cop with curly crop; *
          His gifts overcame me not the gifts of vine:
     His winding locks my patience-clue unwound: *
          His robed beauties robbed all wits of mine."

When Shams Al-Nahar heard this recital from the damsel, she
sighed heavily and the song pleased her. Then she bade another
damsel sing; so she took the lute and began chanting,

     "Face that with Sol in Heaven lamping vies; *
          Youth-tide's fair fountain which begins to rise;
     Whose curly side-beard writeth writ of love, *
          And in each curl concealeth mysteries:
     Cried Beauty, 'When I met this youth I knew *
          'Tis Allah's loom such gorgeous robe supplies.'"

When she had finished her song, Ali bin Bakkar said to the
slave-maiden nearest him, "Sing us somewhat, thou O damsel." So
she took the lute and began singing,

     "Our trysting-time is all too short *
          For this long coyish coquetry:
     How long this 'Nay, Nay!' and 'Wait, wait?' *
          This is not old nobility!
     And now that Time deigns lend delight *
          Profit of th' opportunity."

When she ended, Ali bin Bakkar followed up her song with flowing
tears; and, as Shams al-Nahar saw him weeping and groaning and
complaining, she burned with love-longing and desire; and passion
and transport consumed her. So she rose from the sofa and came to
the door of the alcove, where Ali met her and they embraced with
arms round the neck, and fell down fainting in the doorway;
whereupon the damsels came to them and carrying them into the
alcove, sprinkled rose-water upon them both. When they recovered,
they found not Abu al-Hasan who had hidden himself by the side of
a couch, and the young lady said, "Where is Abu al-Hasan?" So he
showed himself to her from beside the couch and she saluted him,
saying, "I pray Allah to give me the means of requiting thee, O
kindest of men!" Then she turned to Ali bin Bakkar and said to
him, "O my lord, passion hath not reached this extreme pass with
thee without my feeling the like; but we have nothing to do save
to bear patiently what calamity hath befallen us." Replied he,
"By Allah, O my lady, union with thee may not content me nor
gazing upon thee assuage the fire thou hast lighted, nor shall
leave me the love of thee which hath mastered my heart but with
the leaving of my life." So saying, he wept and the tears ran
down upon his cheeks like thridded pearls; and when Shams
al-Nahar saw him weep, she wept for his weeping. But Abu al-Hasan
exclaimed, "By Allah, I wonder at your case and am confounded at
your condition; of a truth, your affair is amazing and your
chance dazing. What! this weeping while ye are yet together: then
how will it be what time ye are parted and far separated?" And he
continued, "Indeed, this is no tide for weeping and wailing, but
a season for meeting and merry-making; rejoice, therefore, and
take your pleasure and shed no more tears!" Then Shams al-Nahar
signed to a slave-girl, who arose and presently returned with
handmaids bearing a table, whose dishes of silver were full of
various rich viands. They set the table before the pair and Shams
al-Nahar began to eat [FN#181] and to place tid-bits in the mouth
of Ali bin Bakkar; and they ceased not so doing till they were
satisfied, when the table was removed and they washed their
hands. Then the waiting-women fetched censers with all manner of
incense, aloe-wood and ambergris and mixed scents; and
sprinkling-flasks full of rose-water were also brought and they
were fumigated and perfumed. After this the slaves set on vessels
of graven gold, containing all kinds of sherbets, besides fruits
fresh and dried, that heart can desire and eye delight in; and
lastly one brought a flagon of carnelion full of old wine. Then
Shams al-Nahar chose out ten handmaids to attend on them and ten
singing women; and, dismissing the rest to their apartments, bade
some of those who remained strike the lute. They did as she bade
them and one of them began to sing,

     "My soul to him who smiled back my salute, *
          In breast reviving hopes that were no mo'e: 
     The hand o' Love my secret brought to light, *
          And censor's tongues what lies my ribs below: [FN#182] 
     My tear-drops ever press twixt me and him, *
          As though my tear-drops showing love would flow."

When she had finished her singing, Shams al-Nahar rose and,
filling a goblet, drank it off, then crowned it again and handed
it to Ali bin Bakkar;--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Shams
al-Nahar filled a goblet and handed it to Ali bin Bakkar; after
which she bade another damsel sing; and she began singing these
couplets,

     "My tears thus flowing rival with my wine, *
          Pouring the like of what fills cup to brink: [FN#183] 
     By Allah wot I not an run these eyne *
          Wi' wine, or else it is of tears I drink."

And when she ended her recitation, Ali bin Bakkar drained his cup
and returned it to Shams al-Nahar. She filled it again and gave
it to Abu al-Hasan who tossed it off. Then she took the lute,
saying, "None shall sing over my cup save myself;" so she screwed
up the strings and intoned these verses,

"The tears run down his cheeks in double row, *
     And in his breast high flameth lover-lowe: 
He weeps when near, a-fearing to be far; *
     And, whether far or near, his tear-drops flow."

And the words of another,

"Our life to thee, O cup-boy Beauty-dight! *
     From parted hair to calves; from black to white: 
Sol beameth from thy hands, and from thy lips *
     Pleiads, and full Moon through thy collar's night, [FN#184] 
Good sooth the cups, which made our heads fly round, *
     Are those thine eyes pass round to daze the sight: 
No wonder lovers hail thee as full moon *
     Waning to them, for self e'er waxing bright: 
Art thou a deity to kill and quicken, *
     Bidding this fere, forbidding other wight? 
Allah from model of thy form made Beau *
     -ty and the Zephyr scented with thy sprite. 
Thou art not of this order of human *
     -ity but angel lent by Heaven to man."

When Ali bin Bakkar and Abu al-Hasan and those present heard
Shams al-Nahar's song, they were like to fly for joy, and sported
and laughed; but while they were thus enjoying themselves lo! up
came a damsel, trembling for fear and said, "O my lady, the
Commander of the Faithful's eunuchs are at the door, Afif and
Masrur and Marjan [FN#185] and others whom wot I not." When they
heard this they were like to die with fright, but Shams al-Nahar
laughed and said, "Have no fear!" Then quoth she to the damsel,
"Keep answering them whilst we remove hence." And she caused the
doors of the alcove to be closed upon Ali and Abu al-Hasan, and
let down the curtains over the entrance (they being still
within); after which she shut the door of the saloon and went out
by the privy wicket into the flower-garden, where she seated
herself on a couch she had there and made one of the damsels
knead her feet. [FN#186] Then she dismissed the rest of her women
to their rooms and bade the portress admit those who were at the
door; whereupon Masrur entered, he and his company of twenty with
drawn swords. And when they saluted her, she asked, "Wherefore
come ye?"; whereto they answered, "The Commander of the Faithful
saluteth thee. Indeed he is desolated for want of thy sight; he
letteth thee know that this be to him a day of joy and great
gladness and he wisheth to seal his day and complete his pleasure
with thy company at this very hour. So say, wilt go to him or
shall he come to thee?" Upon this she rose and, kissing the
earth, replied, "I hear and I obey the commandment of the Prince
of True Believers!" Then she summoned the women guards of her
household and other slave-damsels, who lost no time in attending
upon her and made a show of obeying the Caliph's orders. And
albeit everything about the place was in readiness, she said to
the eunuchs, "Go to the Commander of the Faithful and tell him
that I await him after a little space, that I may make ready for
him a place with carpets and other matters." So they returned in
haste to the Caliph, whilst Shams al-Nahar, doffing her outer
gear, repaired to her lover, Ali bin Bakkar, and drew him to her
bosom and bade him farewell, whereat he wept sore and said, "O my
lady, this leave-taking will cause the ruin of my very self and
the loss of my very soul; but I pray Allah grant me patience to
support the passion wherewith he hath afflicted me!" Replied she,
"By Allah, none shall suffer perdition save I; for thou wilt fare
forth to the bazar and consort with those that shall divert thee,
and thy life will be sound and thy love hidden forsure; but I
shall fall into trouble and tristesse nor find any to console me,
more by token that I have given the Caliph a tryst, wherein haply
great peril shall betide me by reason of my love for thee and my
longing for thee and my grief at being parted from thee. For with
what tongue shall I sing and with what heart shall I present
myself before the Caliph? and with what speech shall I company
the Commander of the Faithful in his cups? and with what eyes
shall I look upon a place where thou art absent? and with what
taste shall I drink wine of which thou drinkest not?" Quoth Abu
al-Hasan, "Be not troubled but take patience and be not remiss in
entertaining the Commander of the Faithful this night, neither
show him any neglect, but be of good heart." Now at this
juncture, behold, up came a damsel, who said to Shams al-Nahar,
"O my lady, the Caliph's pages are come." So she hastily rose to
her feet and said to the maid, "Take Abu al-Hasan and his friend
and carry them to the upper balcony [FN#187] giving upon the
garden and there leave them till darkness come on; when do thou
contrive to carry them forth." Accordingly the girl led them up
to the balcony and, locking the door upon them both, went her
way. As they sat looking on the garden lo! the Caliph appeared
escorted by near an hundred eunuchs, with drawn swords in hand
and girt about with a score of damsels, as they were moons, all
clad in the richest of raiment and on each one's head was a crown
set with jewels and rubies; while each carried a lighted
flambeau. The Caliph walked in their midst, they encompassing him
about on all sides, and Masrur and Afif and Wasif [FN#188] went
before him and he bore himself with a graceful gait. So Shams
al-Nahar and her maidens rose to receive him and, meeting him at
the garden-door, kissed ground between his hands; nor did they
cease to go before him till they brought him to the couch whereon
he sat down, whilst all the waiting-women who were in the garden
and the eunuchs stood before him and there came fair handmaids
and concubines holding in hand lighted candles and perfumes and
incense and instruments of mirth and music. Then the Sovereign
bade the singers sit down, each in her place, and Shams al-Nahar
came up and, seating herself on a stool by the side of the
Caliph's couch, began to converse with him; all this happening
whilst Abu al-Hasan and Ali bin Bakkar looked on and listened,
unseen of the King. Presently the Caliph fell to jesting and
toying with Shams al-Nahar and both were in the highest spirits,
glad and gay, when he bade them throw open the garden pavilion.
So they opened the doors and windows and lighted the tapers till
the place shone in the season of darkness even as the day. Then
the eunuchs removed thither the wine-service and (quoth Abu
al-Hasan) "I saw drinking-vessels and rarities whose like mine
eyes never beheld, vases of gold and silver and all manner of
noble metals and precious stones, such as no power of description
can describe, till indeed it seemed to me I was dreaming, for
excess of amazement at what I saw!" But as for Ali bin Bakkar,
from the moment Shams al-Nahar left him, he lay strown on the
ground for stress of love and desire; and, when he revived, he
fell to gazing upon these things that had not their like and
saying to Abu al-Hasan, "O my brother, I fear lest the Caliph see
us or come to know of our case; but the most of my fear is for
thee. For myself, of a truth I know that I am about to be lost
past recourse, and the cause of my destruction is naught but love
and longing and excess of desire and distraction, and disunion
from my beloved after union with her; but I beseech Allah to
deliver us from this perilous predicament." And they ceased not
to look out of the balcony on the Caliph who was taking his
pleasure, till the banquet was spread before him, when he turned
to one of the damsels and said to her, "O Gharam, [FN#189] let us
hear some of thine enchanting songs." So she took the lute and
tuning it, began singing,

"The longing of a Bedouin maid, whose folks are far away, *
     Who yearns after the willow of the Hejaz and the
     bay, [FN#190]--
Whose tears, when she on travellers lights, might for their water
     serve * And eke her her passion, with its heat, their
     bivouac-fire purvey,--
Is not more fierce nor ardent than my longing for my love, *
     Who deems that I commit a crime in loving him
     alway." [FN#191]

Now when Shams al-Nahar heard these verses she slipped off the
stool whereon she sat and fell to the earth fainting and became
insensible to the world around her; upon which the damsels came
and lifted her up. And when Ali bin Bakkar saw this from the
balcony he also slipped down senseless, and Abu al-Hasan said,
"Verily Fate hath divided love-desire equally upon you
twain!" [FN#192] As he spoke lo! in came the damsel who had led
them up to the balcony and said to him, "O Abu al-Hasan, arise
thou and thy friend and come down, for of a truth the world hath
waxed strait upon us and I fear lest our case be discovered or
the Caliph become aware of you; unless you descend at once we are
dead ones." Quoth he, "And how shall this youth descend with me
seeing that he hath no strength to rise?" Thereupon the damsel
began sprinkling rose-water on Ali bin Bakkar till he came to his
senses, when Abu al-Hasan lifted him up and the damsel made him
lean upon her. So they went down from the balcony and walked on
awhile till the damsel opened a little iron door, and made the
two friends pass through it, and they came upon a bench by the
Tigris' bank. Thereupon the slave-girl clapped her hands [FN#193]
and there came up a man with a little boat to whom said she,
"Take up these two young men and land them on the opposite side."
So both entered the boat and, as the man rowed off with them and
they left the garden behind them, Ali bin Bakkar looked back
towards the Caliph's palace and the pavilion and the grounds; and
bade them farewell with these two couplets,

     "I offered this weak hand as last farewell, *
          While to heart-burning fire that hand is guided:
     O let not this end union! Let not this *
          Be last provision for long road provided!"

Thereupon the damsel said to the boatman, "Make haste with them
both." So he plied his oars deftly (the slave-girl being still
with them);--And Shahrazad perceived the dawning day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Fifty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the boatman
rowed them towards the other bank till they reached it and
landed, whereupon she took leave of them, saying, "It were my
wish not to abandon you, but I can go no farther than this." Then
she turned back, whilst Ali bin Bakkar lay prostrate on the
ground before Abu al-Hasan and by no manner of means could he
rise, till his friend said to him, "Indeed this place is not sure
and I fear lest we lose our lives in this very spot, by reason of
the lewd fellows who infest it and highwaymen and men of
lawlessness." Upon this Ali bin Bakkar arose and walked a little
but could not continue walking. Now Abu al-Hasan had friends in
that quarter; so he made search for one of them, in whom he
trusted, and who was of his intimates, and knocked at the door.
The man came out quickly and seeing them, bade them welcome and
brought them into his house, where he seated them and talked with
them and asked them whence they came. Quoth Abu al-Hasan, "We
came out but now, being obliged thereto by a person with whom I
had dealings and who hath in his hands dirhams of mine. And it
reached me that he designed to flee into foreign parts with my
monies; so I fared forth to-night in quest of him, taking with me
for company this youth, Ali bin Bakkar; but, when we came hoping
to see the debtor, he hid from us and we could get no sight of
him. Accordingly we turned back, empty-handed without a doit, but
it was irksome to us to return home at this hour of the night; so
weeting not whither to go, we came to thee, well knowing thy
kindness and wonted courtesy." "Ye are welcome and well come!"
answered the host, and studied to do them honour; so the twain
abode with him the rest of their night and as soon as the
daylight dawned, they left him and made their way back without
aught of delay to the city. When they came to the house of Abu
al-Hasan, he conjured his comrade to enter; so they went in and
lying down on the bed, slept awhile. As soon as they awoke, Abu
al-Hasan bade his servants spread the house with rich carpets,
saying in his mind, "Needs must I divert this youth and distract
him from thinking of his affliction, for I know his case better
than another." Then he called for water for Ali bin Bakkar who,
when it was brought, rose up from his bed and making his
ablutions, prayed the obligatory prayers which he had omitted for
the past day and night [FN#194]; after which he sat down and began
to solace himself by talking with his friend. When Abu al-Hasan
saw this, he turned to him and said, "O my lord, it were fitter
for thy case that thou abide with me this night, so thy breast
may be broadened and the distress of love-longing that is upon
thee be dispelled and thou make merry with us, so haply the fire
of thy heart may thus be quenched." Ali replied, "O my brother,
do what seemeth good to thee; for I may not on any wise escape
from what calamity hath befallen me; so act as thou wilt."
Accordingly, Abu al-Hasan arose and bade his servants summon some
of the choicest of his friends and sent for singers and musicians
who came; and meanwhile he made ready meat and drink for them; so
they sat eating and drinking and making merry through the rest of
the day till nightfall. Then they lit the candles, and the cups
of friendship and good fellowship went round amongst them and the
time passed pleasantly with them. Presently, a singing-woman took
the lute and began singing, 

"I've been shot by Fortune, and shaft of eye *
     Down struck me and parted from fondest friend:
Time has proved him foe and my patience failed, *
     Yet I ever expected it thus would end."

When Ali bin Bakkar heard her words, he fell to the earth in a
swoon and ceased not lying in his fainting fit till day-break;
and Abu al-Hasan despaired of him. But, with the dawning, he came
to himself and sought to go home; nor could his friend hinder
him, for fear of the issue of his affair. So he made his servants
bring a she-mule and, mounting Ali thereon, carried him to his
lodgings, he and one of his men. When he was safe at home, Abu
al-Hasan thanked Allah for his deliverance from that sore peril
and sat awhile with him, comforting him; but Ali could not
contain himself, for the violence of his love and longing. So Abu
al-Hasan rose to take leave of him and return to his own
place.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Abu
al-Hasan rose to take leave of him, Ali son of Bakkar exclaimed,
"O my brother, leave me not without news." "I hear and obey,"
replied the other; and forthwith went away and, repairing to his
shop, opened it and sat there all day, expecting news of Shams
al-Nahar. But none came. He passed the night in his own house
and, when dawned the day, he walked to Ali bin Bakkar's lodging
and went in and found him thrown on his bed, with his friends
about him and physicians around him prescribing something or
other, and the doctors feeling his pulse. When he saw Abu
al-Hasan enter he smiled, and the visitor, after saluting him,
enquired how he did and sat with him till the folk withdrew, when
he said to him, "What plight is this?" Quoth Ali bin Bakkar, "It
was bruited abroad that I was ill and my comrades heard the
report; and I have no strength to rise and walk so as to give him
the lie who noised abroad my sickness, but continue lying strown
here as thou seest. So my friends came to visit me; say, however,
O my brother, hast thou seen the slave-girl or heard any news of
her?" He replied, "I have not seen her, since the day we parted
from her on Tigris' bank;" and he presently added, "O my brother,
beware thou of scandal and leave this weeping." Rejoined Ali, "O
my brother, indeed, I have no control over myself;" and he sighed
and began reciting,

"She gives her woman's hand a force that fails the hand of me, *
     And with red dye on wrist she gars my patience fail and
     flee:
And for her hand she fears so sore what shafts her eyes
     discharge, * She's fain to clothe and guard her hand with
     mail-ring panoply: [FN#195]
The leach in ignorance felt my pulse the while to him I cried, *
     'Sick is my heart, so quit my hand which hath no malady:'
Quoth she to that fair nightly vision favoured me and fled, *
     'By Allah picture him nor add nor 'bate in least degree!'
Replied the Dream, 'I leave him though he die of thirst,'
     I cry, * 'Stand off from water-pit and say why this
     persistency.'
Rained tear-pearls her Narcissus-eyes, and rose on cheek belit *
     She made my sherbet, and the lote with bits of hail she
     bit." [FN#196]

And when his recital was ended he said, "O Abu al-Hasan, I am
smitten with an affliction from which I deemed myself in perfect
surety, and there is no greater ease for me than death." Replied
he, "Be patient, haply Allah will heal thee!" Then he went out
from him and repairing to his shop opened it, nor had he sat
long, when suddenly up came the handmaid who saluted him. He
returned her salam and looking at her, saw that her heart was
palpitating and that she was in sore trouble and showed signs of
great affliction: so he said to her, "Thou art welcome and well
come! How is it with Shams al-Nahar?" She answered, "I will
presently tell thee, but first let me know how doth Ali bin
Bakkar." So he told her all that had passed and how his case
stood, whereat she grieved and sighed and lamented and marvelled
at his condition. Then said she, "My lady's case is still
stranger than this; for when you went away and fared homewards, I
turned back, my heart beating hard on your account and hardly
crediting your escape. On entering I found her lying prostrate in
the pavilion, speaking not nor answering any, whilst the
Commander of the Faithful sat by her head not knowing what ailed
her and finding none who could make known to him aught of her
ailment. She ceased not from her swoon till midnight, when she
recovered and the Prince of the Faithful said to her, 'What harm
hath happened to thee, O Shams al-Nahar, and what hath befallen
thee this night?' Now when she heard the Caliph's words she
kissed his feet and said, 'Allah make me thy ransom, O Prince of
True Believers! Verily a sourness of stomach lighted a fire in my
body, so that I lost my senses for excess of pain, and I know no
more of my condition.' Asked the Caliph, 'What hast thou eaten
to-day?'; and she answered, 'I broke my fast on something I had
never tasted before.' Then she feigned to be recovered and
calling for a something of wine, drank it, and begged the
Sovereign to resume his diversion. So he sat down again on his
couch in the pavilion and the sitting was resumed, but when she
saw me, she asked me how you fared. I told her what I had done
with you both and repeated to her the verses which Ali bin Bakkar
had composed at parting-tide, whereat she wept secretly, but
presently held her peace. After awhile, the Commander of the
Faithful ordered a damsel to sing, and she began reciting,

     'Life has no sweet for me since forth ye fared; *
          Would Heaven I wot how fare ye who forsake:
     'Twere only fit my tears were tears of blood, *
          Since you are weeping for mine absence sake.'

But when my lady heard this verse she fell back on the sofa in a
swoon,"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
slave-girl continued to Abu al-Hasan, "But when my lady heard
this verse, she fell back on the sofa in a swoon, and I seized
her hand and sprinkled rose-water on her face, till she revived,
when I said to her, 'O my lady, expose not thyself and all thy
palace containeth. By the life of thy beloved, be thou patient!'
She replied, 'Can aught befal me worse than death which indeed I
seek, for by Allah, my ease is therein?' Whilst we were thus
talking, another damsel sang these words of the poet,

     'Quoth they, 'Maybe that Patience lend thee ease!' *
          Quoth I, 'Since fared he where is Patience' place?
     Covenant he made 'twixt me and him, to cut *
          The cords of Patience at our last embrace!' [FN#197]

And as soon as she had finished her verse Shams al-Nahar swooned
away once more, which when the Caliph saw, he came to her in
haste and commanded the wine to be removed and each damsel to
return to her chamber. He abode with her the rest of the night,
and when dawned the day, he sent for chirurgeons and leaches and
bade them medicine her, knowing not that her sickness arose from
love and longing. I tarried with her till I deemed her in a way
of recovery, and this is what kept me from thee. I have now left
her with a number of her body-women, who were greatly concerned
for her, when she bade me go to you two and bring her news of Ali
bin Bakkar and return to her with the tidings." When Abu al-Hasan
heard her story, he marvelled and said, "By Allah, I have
acquainted thee with his whole case; so now return to thy
mistress; and salute her for me and diligently exhort her to have
patience and say to her, 'Keep thy secret!'; and tell her that I
know all her case which is indeed hard and one which calleth for
nice conduct." She thanked him and taking leave of him, returned
to her mistress. So far concerning her; but as regards Abu
al-Hasan, he ceased not to abide in his shop till the end of the
day, when he arose and shut it and locked it and betaking himself
to Ali bin Bakkar's house knocked at the door. One of the
servants came out and admitted him; and when Ali saw him, he
smiled and congratulated himself on his coming, saying, "O Abu
al-Hasan, thou hast desolated me by thine absence this day; for
indeed my soul is pledged to thee during the rest of my time."
Answered the other, "Leave this talk! Were thy healing at the
price of my hand, I would cut it off ere thou couldst ask me;
and, could I ransom thee with my life, I had already laid it down
for thee. Now this very day, Shams al-Nahar's handmaid hath been
with me and told me that what hindered her coming ere this was
the Caliph's sojourn with her mistress; and she acquainted me
with everything which had betided her." And he went on to repeat
to him all that the girl had told him of Shams al-Nahar; at which
Ali bin Bakkar lamented sore and wept and said to him, "Allah
upon thee, O my brother, help me in this affliction and teach me
what course I shall take. Moreover, I beg thee of thy grace to
abide with me this night, that I may have the solace of thy
society." Abu al-Hasan agreed to this request, replying that he
would readily night there; so they talked together till even-tide
darkened, when Ali bin Bakkar groaned aloud and lamented and wept
copious tears, reciting these couplets,

     "Thine image in these eyne, a-lip thy name, *
          My heart thy home; how couldst thou disappear?
     How sore I grieve for life which comes to end, *
          Nor see I boon of union far or near."

And these the words of another,

"She split my casque of courage with eye-swords that sorely
     smite; * She pierced my patience' ring-mail with her shape
     like cane-spear light:
Patched by the musky mole on cheek was to our sight displayed *
     Camphor set round with ambergris, light dawning through the
     night. [FN#198]
Her soul was sorrowed and she bit carnelion stone with pearls *
     Whose unions in a sugared tank ever to lurk unite: [FN#199]
Restless she sighed and smote with palm the snows that clothe her
     breast, * And left a mark whereon I looked and ne'er beheld
     such sight, 
Pens, fashioned of her coral nails with ambergris for ink, * 
     Five lines on crystal page of breast did cruelly indite:
O swordsmen armed with trusty steel! I bid you all beware *
     When she on you bends deadly glance which fascinates the
     sprite: 
And guard thyself, O thou of spear! whenas she draweth near *
     To tilt with slender quivering shape, likest the nut-brown
     spear."

And when Ali bin Bakkar ended his verse, he cried out with a
great cry and fell down in a fit. Abu al-Hasan thought that his
soul had fled his body and he ceased not from his swoon till day-
break, when he came to himself and talked with his friend, who
continued to sit with him till the forenoon. Then he left him and
repaired to his shop; and hardly had he opened it, when lo! the
damsel came and stood by his side. As soon as he saw her, she
made him a sign of salutation which he returned; and she
delivered to him the greeting message of her mistress and asked,
"How doth Ali bin Bakkar?" Answered he, "O handmaid of good, ask
me not of his case nor what he suffereth for excess of
love-longing; he sleepeth not by night neither resteth he by day;
wakefulness wasteth him and care hath conquered him and his
condition is a consternation to his friend." Quoth she, "My lady
saluteth thee and him, and she hath written him a letter, for
indeed she is in worse case than he; and she entrusted the same
to me, saying, 'Do not return save with the answer; and do thou
obey my bidding.' Here now is the letter, so say, wilt thou wend
with me to him that we may get his reply?" "I hear and obey,"
answered Abu al-Hasan, and locking his shop and taking with him
the girl he went, by a way different from that whereby he came,
to Ali bin Bakkar's house, where he left her standing at the door
and walked in.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abu
al-Hasan went with the girl to the house of Ali son of Bakkar,
where he left her standing at the door and walked in to his great
joy. And Abu al-Hasan said to him, "The reason of my coming is
that such an one hath sent his handmaid to thee with a letter,
containing his greeting to thee and mentioning therein that the
cause of his not coming to thee was a matter that hath betided
him. The girl standeth even now at the door: shall she have leave
to enter?"; and he signed to him that it was Shams al-Nahar's
slave-girl. Ali understood his signal and answered, "Bring her
in," and when he saw her, he shook for joy and signed to her,
"How doth thy lord?; Allah grant him health and healing!" "He is
well," answered she and pulling out the letter gave it to him. He
took it and kissing it, opened and read it; after which he handed
it to Abu al-Hasan, who found these verses written therein,

     "This messenger shall give my news to thee; *
          Patience what while my sight thou canst not see:
     A lover leav'st in love's insanity, *
          Whose eyne abide on wake incessantly:
     I suffer patience-pangs in woes that none *
          Of men can medicine;--such my destiny!
     Keep cool thine eyes; ne'er shall my heart forget, *
          Nor without dream of thee one day shall be.
     Look what befel thy wasted frame, and thence *
          Argue what I am doomed for love to dree!

"And afterwards [FN#200]: Without fingers [FN#201] I have written
to thee, and without tongue I have spoken to thee * to resume my
case, I have an eye wherefrom sleeplessness departeth not * and a
heart whence sorrowful thought stirreth not * It is with me as
though health I had never known * nor in sadness ever ceased to
wone * nor spent an hour in pleasant place * but it is as if I
were made up of pine and of the pain of passion and chagrin *
Sickness unceasingly troubleth * and my yearning ever redoubleth
* desire still groweth * and longing in my heart still gloweth *
I pray Allah to hasten our union * and dispel of my mind the
confusion * And I would fain thou favour me * with some words of
thine * that I may cheer my heart in pain and repine * Moreover,
I would have thee put on a patience lief, until Allah vouchsafe
relief * And His peace be with thee." [FN#202] When Ali bin Bakkar
had read this letter he said in weak accents and feeble voice,
"With what hand shall I write and with what tongue shall I make
moan and lament? Indeed she addeth sickness to my sickness and
draweth death upon my death!" Then he sat up and taking in hand
ink-case and paper, wrote the following reply, "In the name of
Allah, the Compassionating, the Compassionate! [FN#203] Thy letter
hath reached me, O my lady, and hath given ease to a sprite worn
out with passion and love-longing, and hath brought healing to a
wounded heart cankered with languishment and sickness; for indeed
I am become even as saith the poet,

     'Straitened bosom; reveries dispread; *
          Slumberless eyelids; body wearied; 
     Patience cut short; disunion longsomest; *
          Reason deranged and heart whose life is fled!'

And know that complaining is unavailing; but it easeth him whom
love-longing disordereth and separation destroyeth and, with
repeating, 'Union,' I keep myself comforted and how fine is the
saying of the poet who said, 

     'Did not in love-plight joys and sorrows meet, *
          How would the message or the writ be sweet?'"

When he had made an end of this letter, he handed it to Abu
al-Hasan, saying, "Read it and give it to the damsel." So he took
it and read it and its words stirred his soul and its meaning
wounded his vitals. Then he committed it to the girl, and when
she took it Ali bin Bakkar said to her, "Salute thy lady for me
and acquaint her with my love and longing and how passion is
blended with my flesh and my bones; and say to her that in very
deed I need a woman who shall snatch me from the sea of
destruction and save me from this dilemma; for of a truth Fortune
oppresseth me with her vicissitudes; and is there any helper to
free me from her turpitudes?" And he wept and the damsel wept for
his weeping. Then she took leave of him and went forth and Abu
al-Hasan went out with her and farewelled her. So she ganged her
gait and he returned to his shop, which he opened and sat down
there, as was his wont;--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Fifty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Abu
al-Hasan farewelled the slave-girl and returned to his shop which
he opened and sat down there according to his custom; but as he
tarried, he found his heart oppressed and his breast straitened,
and he was perplexed about his case. So he ceased not from
melancholy the rest of that day and night, and on the morrow he
betook himself to Ali bin Bakkar, with whom he sat till the folk
withdrew, when he asked him how he did. Ali began to complain of
desire and to descant upon the longing and distraction which
possessed him, and repeated these words of the poet.

     "Men have 'plained of pining before my time, *
          Live and dead by parting been terrified: 
     But such feelings as those which my ribs immure *
          I have never heard of, nor ever espied."

And these of another poet,

     "I have borne for thy love what never bore *
          For his fair, Kays the 'Daft one' [FN#204] hight of old: 
     Yet I chase not the wildlings of wold and wild *
          Like Kays, for madness is manifold."

Thereupon quoth Abu al-Hasan, "Never did I see or hear of one
like unto thee in thy love! When thou sufferest all this
transport and sickness and trouble being enamoured of one who
returneth thy passion, how would it be with thee if she whom thou
lovest were contrary and contumelious, and thy case were
discovered through her perfidy?" "And Ali the son of Bakkar"
(says Abu al-Hasan) "was pleased with my words and he relied upon
them and he thanked me for what I had said and done. I had a
friend" (continued Abu al-Hasan), "to whom I discovered my affair
and that of Ali and who knew that we were intimates; but none
other than he was acquainted with what was betwixt us. He was
wont to come to me and enquire how Ali did and after a little, he
began to ask me about the damsel; but I fenced him off, saying,
'She invited him to her and there was between him and her as much
as can possibly take place, and this is the end of their affair;
but I have devised me a plan and an idea which I would submit to
thee.'" Asked his friend, "And what is that?" Answered Abu
al-Hasan, "I am a person well known to have much dealing among
men and women, and I fear, O my brother, lest the affair of these
twain come to light and this lead to my death and the seizure of
my goods and the rending of my repute and that of my family.
Wherefore I have resolved to get together my monies and make
ready forthright and repair to the city of Bassorah and there
abide, till I see what cometh of their case, that none may know
of me; for love hath lorded over both and correspondence passeth
between them. At this present their go-between and confidante is
a slave-girl who hath till now kept their counsel, but I fear
lest haply anxiety get the better of her and she discover their
secret to some one and the matter, being bruited abroad, might
bring me to great grief and prove the cause of my ruin; for I
have no excuse to offer my accusers." Rejoined his friend, "Thou
hast acquainted me with a parlous affair, from the like of which
the wise and understanding will shrink with fear. Allah avert
from thee the evil thou dreadest with such dread and save thee
from the consequences thou apprehendest! Assuredly thy recking is
aright." So Abu al-Hasan returned to his place and began ordering
his affairs and preparing for his travel; nor had three days
passed ere he made an end of his business and fared forth
Bassorah-wards. His friend came to visit him three days after but
finding him not, asked of him from the neighbours who answered,
"He set out for Bassorah three days ago, for he had dealings with
its merchants and he is gone thither to collect monies from his
debtors; but he will soon return." The young man was confounded
at the news and knew not whither to wend; and he said in his
mind, "Would I had not parted from Abu al-Hasan!" Then he
bethought him of some plan whereby he should gain access to Ali
bin Bakkar; so he went to his lodging, and said to one of his
servants, "Ask leave for me of thy lord that I may go in and
salute him." The servant entered and told his master and
presently returning, invited the man to walk in. So he entered
and found Ali bin Bakkar thrown back on the pillow and saluted
him. Ali returned his greeting and bade him welcome; whereupon
the young man began to excuse himself for having held aloof from
him all that while and added, "O my lord, between Abu al-Hasan
and myself there was close friendship, so that I used to trust
him with my secrets and could not sever myself from him an hour.
Now it so chanced that I was absent three days' space on certain
business with a company of my friends; and, when I came back and
went to him, I found his shop locked up; so I asked the
neighbours about him and they replied, 'He is gone to Bassorah.'
Now I know he had no surer friend than thou; so, by Allah, tell
me what thou knowest of him." When Ali bin Bakkar heard this, his
colour changed and he was troubled and answered, "I never heard
till this day of his departure and, if the case be as thou
sayest, weariness is come upon me." And he began repeating,

     "For joys that are no more I wont to weep, *
          While friends and lovers stood by me unscattered; 
     This day when disunited me and them *
          Fortune, I weep lost loves and friendship shattered."

Then he hung his head ground-wards in thought awhile and
presently raising it and looking to one of his servants, said,
"Go to Abu al-Hasan's house and enquire anent him whether he be
at home or journeying abroad. If they say, 'He is abroad'; ask
whither he be gone." The servant went out and returning after a
while said to his master, "When I asked for Abu al-Hasan, his
people told me that he was gone on a journey to Bassorah; but I
saw a damsel standing at the door who, knowing me by sight,
though I knew her not, said to me, 'Art thou not servant to Ali
bin Bakkar?' 'Even so,' answered I; and she rejoined, 'I bear a
message for him from one who is the dearest of all folk to him.'
So she came with me and she is now standing at the door." Quoth
Ali bin Bakkar, "Bring her in." The servant went out to her and
brought her in, and the man who was with Ali looked at her and
found her pretty. Then she advanced to the son of Bakkar and
saluted him.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say,

        When it was the One Hundred and Sixtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
slave-girl came in to Ali bin Bakkar, she advanced to him and
saluted him and spake with him secretly; and from time to time
during the dialogue he exclaimed with an oath and swore that he
had not talked and tattled of it. Then she took leave of him and
went away. Now Abu al-Hasan's friend was a jeweller, [FN#205] and
when she was gone, he found a place for speech and said to Ali
bin Bakkar, "Doubtless and assuredly the Caliph's household have
some demand upon thee or thou hast dealings therewith?" "Who told
thee of this?" asked Ali; and the jeweller answered, "I know it
by yonder damsel who is Shams al-Nahar's slave-girl; for she came
to me a while since with a note wherein was written that she
wanted a necklace of jewels; and I sent her a costly collar." But
when Ali bin Bakkar heard this, he was greatly troubled, so that
the jeweller feared to see him give up the ghost, yet after a
while he recovered himself and said, "O my brother, I conjure
thee by Allah to tell me truly how thou knowest her." Replied he,
"Do not press this question upon me;" and Ali rejoined, "Indeed,
I will not turn from thee till thou tell me the whole truth."
Quoth the jeweller, "I will tell thee all, on condition that thou
distrust me not, and that my words cause thee no restraint; nor
will I conceal aught from thee by way of secret but will discover
to thee the truth of the affair, provided that thou acquaint me
with the true state of thy case and the cause of thy sickness."
Then he told him all that had passed from first to last between
Abu al-Hasan and himself, adding, "I acted thus only out of
friendship for thee and of my desire to serve thee;" and assured
him that he would keep his secret and venture life and good in
his service. So Ali in turn told him his story and added, "By
Allah, O my brother, naught moved me to keep my case secret from
thee and from others but my fear lest folk should lift the veils
of protection from certain persons." Rejoined the jeweller, "And
I desired not to foregather with thee but of the great affection
I bear thee and my zeal for thee in every case, and my compassion
for the anguish thy heart endureth from severance. Haply I may be
a comforter to thee in the room of my friend, Abu al-Hasan,
during the length of his absence: so be thou of good cheer and
keep thine eyes cool and clear." Thereupon Ali thanked him and
repeated these couplets,

     "An say I, 'Patient I can bear his faring,' *
          My tears and sighings give my say the lie; 
     How can I hide these tears that course adown *
          This plain, my cheek, for friend too fain to fly?"

Then he was silent awhile, and presently said to the jeweller
"Knowest thou what secret the girl whispered to me?" Answered he,
"Not I, by Allah, O my lord!" Quoth Ali, "She fancied that I
directed Abu al-Hasan to go to Bassorah and that I had devised
this device to put a stop to our correspondence and consorting. I
swore to her that this was on nowise so; but she would not credit
me and went away to her mistress, persisting in her injurious
suspicions; for she inclined to Abu al-Hasan and gave ear to his
word." Answered the young jeweller, "O my brother, I understood
as much from the girl's manner; but I will win for thee thy wish,
Inshallah!" Rejoined Ali bin Bakkar, "Who can be with me in this
and how wilt thou do with her, when she shies and flies like a
wildling of the wold?" Cried the jeweller "By Allah, needs must I
do my utmost to help thee and contrive to scrape acquaintance
with her without exposure or mischief!" Then he asked leave to
depart and Ali bin Bakkar said, "O my brother, mind thou keep my
counsel;" and he looked at him and wept. The jeweller bade him
good-bye and fared forth.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Sixty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
jeweller bade him good-bye and fared forth not knowing what he
should do to win for him his wishes; and he ceased not walking,
while over-musing the matter, till he spied a letter lying in the
road. He took it up and looked at its direction and
superscription, then read it and behold, it ran:--"From the least
worthy of lovers to the most worthy of beloveds." So he opened it
and found these words written therein,

"A messenger from thee came bringing union-hope, *
     But that he erred somehow with me the thought prevailed; 
So I rejoiced not; rather grew my grief still more; *
     Weeting my messenger of wits and wit had failed.

"But afterwards: Know, O my lord! that I ken not the reason why
our correspondence between thee and me hath been broken off: but,
if the cruelty arise from thy part, I will requite it with
fidelity, and if thy love have departed, I will remain constant
to my love of the parted, for I am with thee even as says the
poet,

'Be proud; I'll crouch! Bully; I'll bear! Despise; I'll pray! *
     Go; I will come! Speak; I will hear! Bid; I'll obey!'"

As he was reading lo! up came the slave-girl, looking right and
left, and seeing the paper in the jeweller's hand, said to him,
"O my master, this letter is one I let fall." He made her no
answer, but walked on, and she walked behind him, till he came to
his house, when he entered and she after him, saying, "O my
master, give me back this letter, for it fell from me." Thereon
he turned to her and said, "O handmaid of good, fear not neither
grieve, for verily Allah the Protector loveth those who protect;
but tell me in truthful way thy case, as I am one who keepeth
counsel. I conjure thee by an oath not to hide from me aught of
thy lady's affairs; for haply Allah shall help me to further her
wishes and make easy by my hand that which is hard." When the
slave-girl heard these words she said, "O my lord, indeed a
secret is not lost whereof thou art the secretist; nor shall any
affair come to naught for which thou strivest. Know that my heart
inclineth to thee and would interest thee with my tidings, but do
thou give me the letter." Then she told him the whole story,
adding, "Allah is witness to whatso I say." Quoth he, "Thou hast
spoken truly, for I am acquainted with the root of the matter."
Then he told her his tale of Ali bin Bakkar and how he had
learned his state of mind; and related to her all that had passed
from first to last, whereat she rejoiced; and they two agreed
that she should take the letter and carry it to Ali and return
and acquaint the jeweller with all that happened. So he gave her
the letter and she took it and sealed it up as it was before,
saying, "My mistress Shams al-Nahar gave it to me sealed; and
when he hath read it and given me its reply, I will bring it to
thee." Then she took leave and repaired to Ali bin Bakkar, whom
she found waiting, and gave him the letter. He read it and
writing a paper by way of reply, gave it to her; and she carried
it to the jeweller, who tore asunder the seal [FN#206] and read it
and found written therein these two couplets,

"The messenger, who kept our commerce hid, *
     Hath failed, and showeth wrath without disguise; [FN#207] 
Choose one more leal from your many friends *
     Who, truth approving, disapproves of lies.

"To proceed: Verily, I have not entered upon perfidy * nor have I
abandoned fidelity * I have not used cruelty * neither have I out
off lealty * no covenant hath been broken by me * nor hath
love-tie been severed by me * I have not parted from penitence *
nor have I found aught but misery and ruin after severance * I
know nothing of that thou avouchest * nor do I love aught but
that which thou lovest * By Him who knoweth the secret of hidden
things none discover *I have no desire save union with my lover *
and my one business is my passion to conceal * albeit with sore
sickness I ail. * This is the exposition of my case and now all
hail!" When the jeweller read this letter and learnt its contents
he wept with sore weeping, and the slave-girl said to him, "Leave
not this place till I return to thee; for he suspecteth me of
such and such things, in which he is excusable; so it is my
desire to bring about a meeting between thee and my mistress,
Shams al-Nahar, howsoever I may trick you to it. For the present
I left her prostrate, awaiting my return with the reply." Then
she went away and the jeweller passed the night with a troubled
mind. And when day dawned he prayed his dawn-prayer and sat
expecting the girl's coming; and behold, she came in to him
rejoicing with much joy and he asked her, "What news, O damsel?"
She answered, "After leaving thee I went to my mistress and gave
her the letter written by Ali bin Bakkar; and, when she read it
and understood it, she was troubled and confounded; but I said to
her, 'O my lady, have no fear of your affair being frustrated by
Abu al-Hasan's disappearance, for I have found one to take his
place, better than he and more of worth and a good man to keep
secrets.' Then I told her what was between thyself and Abu
al-Hasan and how thou camest by his confidence and that of Ali
bin Bakkar and how that note was dropped and thou camest by it;
and I also showed her how we arranged matters betwixt me and
thee." The jeweller marvelled with much wonder, when she resumed,
"And now my mistress would hear whatso thou sayest, that she may
be assured by thy speech of the covenants between thee and him;
so get thee ready to go with me to her forthwith." When the
jeweller heard the slave-girl's words, he saw that the proposed
affair was grave and a great peril to brave, not lightly to be
undertaken or suddenly entered upon, and he said to her, "O my
sister, verily, I am of the ordinary and not like unto Abu
al-Hasan; for he being of high rank and of well-known repute, was
wont to frequent the Caliph's household, because of their need of
his merchandise. As for me, he used to talk with me and I
trembled before him the while. So, if thy mistress would speak
with me, our meeting must be in some place other than the
Caliph's palace and far from the abode of the Commander of the
Faithful; for my common sense will not let me consent to what
thou proposest." On this wise he refused to go with her and she
went on to say that she would be surety for his safety, adding,
"Take heart and fear no harm!" and pressed him to courage till he
consented to accompany her; withal, his legs bent and shivered
and his hands quivered and he exclaimed, "Allah forbid that I
should go with thee! Indeed, I have not strength to do this
thing!" Replied she, "Hearten thy heart, if it be hard for thee
to go to the Caliph's palace and thou canst not muster up courage
to accompany me, I will make her come to thee; so budge not from
thy place till I return to thee with her." Then the slave-girl
went away and was absent for a while, but a short while, after
which she returned to the jeweller and said to him, "Take thou
care that there be with thee none save thyself, neither man-slave
nor girl-slave." Quoth he, "I have but a negress, who is in years
and who waiteth on me." [FN#208] So she arose and locked the door
between his negress and the jeweller and sent his man-servants
out of the place; after which she fared forth and presently
returned, followed by a lady who, entering the house, filled it
with the sweet scent of her perfumes. When the jeweller saw her,
he sprang up and set her a couch and a cushion; and she sat down
while he seated himself before her. She abode awhile without
speaking till she had rested herself, when she unveiled her face
and it seemed to the jeweller's fancy as if the sun had risen in
his home. Then she asked her slave-girl, "Is this the man of whom
thou spakest to me?" "Yes," answered she; whereupon the lady
turned to the jeweller and said to him, "How is it with thee?"
Replied he, "Right well! I pray Allah for thy preservation and
that of the Commander of the Faithful." Quoth she, "Thou hast
moved us to come to thee and possess thee with what we hold
secret." Then she questioned him of his household and family; and
he disclosed to her all his circumstance and his condition and
said to her, "I have a house other than this; and I have set it
apart for gathering together my friends and brethren; and there
is none there save the old negress, of whom I spoke to thy
handmaid." She asked him on what wise he came first to know how
the affair began and the matter of Abu al-Hasan and the cause of
his way-faring: accordingly he told her all he knew and how he
had advised the journey. Thereupon she bewailed the loss of Abu
al-Hasan and said to the jeweller, "Know, O such an one, [FN#209]
that men's souls are active in their lusts and that men are still
men; and that deeds are not done without words nor is end ever
reached without endeavour. Rest is won only by work."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Sixty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Shams
al-Nahar thus addressed the jeweller, "Rest is gained only by
work and success is gendered only by help of the generous. Now I
have acquainted thee with our affair and it is in thy hand to
expose us or to shield us; I say no more, because thy generosity
requireth naught. Thou knowest that this my handmaiden keepeth my
counsel and therefore occupieth high place in my favour; and I
have selected her to transact my affairs of importance. So let
none be worthier in thy sight than she and acquaint her with
thine affair; and be of good cheer, for on her account thou art
safe from all fear, and there is no place shut upon thee but she
shall open it to thee. She shall bring thee my messages to Ali
bin Bakkar and thou shalt be our intermediary." So saying, she
rose, scarcely able to rise, and fared forth, the jeweller faring
before her to the door of her house, after which he returned and
sat down again in his place, having seen of her beauty and heard
of her speech what dazzled him and dazed his wit, and having
witnessed of her grace and courtesy what bewitched his sprite. He
sat musing on her perfections till his mind waxed tranquil, when
he called for food and ate enough to keep soul and body together.
Then he changed his clothes and went out; and, repairing to the
house of the youth Ali bin Bakkar, knocked at the door. The
servants hastened to admit him and walked before him till they
had brought him to their master, whom he found strown upon his
bed. Now when he saw the jeweller, he said to him, "Thou hast
tarried long from me, and that hath heaped care upon my care."
Then he dismissed his servants and bade the doors be shut; after
which he said to the jeweller, "By Allah, O my brother, I have
not closed my eyes since the day I saw thee last; for the
slave-girl came to me yesterday with a sealed letter from her
mistress Shams al-Nahar;" and went on to tell him all that had
passed with her, adding, "By the Lord, I am indeed perplexed
concerning mine affair and my patience faileth me: for Abu
al-Hasan was a comforter who cheered me because he knew the
slave-girl." When the jeweller heard his words, he laughed; and
Ali said, "Why dost thou laugh at my words, thou on whose coming
I congratulated myself and to whom I looked for provision against
the shifts of fortune?" Then he sighed and wept and repeated
these couplets, [FN#210]

     "Full many laugh at tears they see me shed *
          Who had shed tears an bore they what I bore; 
     None feeleth pity for th' afflicted's woe, *
          Save one as anxious and in woe galore: 
     My passion, yearning, sighing, thought, repine *
          Are for me cornered in my heart's deep core: 
     He made a home there which he never quits, *
          Yet rare our meetings, not as heretofore: 
     No friend to stablish in his place I see; *
          No intimate but only he and --he."

Now when the jeweller heard these lines and understood their
significance, he wept also and told him all that had passed
betwixt himself and the slave-girl and her mistress since he left
him. And Ali bin Bakkar gave ear to his speech, and at every word
he heard his colour shifted from white to red and his body grew
now stronger and then weaker till the tale came to an end, when
he wept and said, "O my brother, I am a lost man in any case:
would mine end were nigh, that I might be at rest from all this!
But I beg thee, of thy favour, to be my helper and comforter in
all my affairs till Allah fulfil whatso be His will; and I will
not gainsay thee with a single word." Quoth the jeweller,
"Nothing will quench thy fire save union with her whom thou
lovest; and the meeting must be in other than this perilous
place. Better it were in a house of mine where the girl and her
mistress met me; which place she chose for herself, to the intent
that ye twain may there meet and complain each to other of what
you have suffered from the pangs of love." Quoth Ali bin Bakkar,
"O good Sir, do as thou wilt and with Allah be thy reward!; and
what thou deemest is right do it forthright: but be not long in
doing it, lest I perish of this anguish." "So I abode with him
(said the jeweller) that night conversing with him till the
morning morrowed,"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Sixty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
jeweller continued:--"So I abode with him that night conversing
with him till the morning morrowed, when I prayed the
dawn-prayers and, going out from him, returned to my house.
Hardly had I settled down when the damsel came up and saluted me;
and I returned her salutation and told her what had passed
between myself and Ali bin Bakkar, and she said, 'Know that the
Caliph hath left us and there is no one in our place and it is
safer for us and better.' Replied I, 'Sooth thou sayest; yet is
it not like my other house which is both fitter and surer for
us;' and the slave-girl rejoined 'Be it as thou seest fit. I am
now going to my lady and will tell her what thou sayest and
acquaint her with all thou hast mentioned.' So she went away and
sought her mistress and laid the project before her, and
presently returned and said to me, 'It is to be as thou sayest:
so make us ready the place and expect us.' Then she took out of
her breast-pocket a purse of dinars and gave this message, 'My
lady saluteth thee and saith to thee, 'Take this and provide
therewith what the case requireth.' But I swore that I would
accept naught of it; so she took the purse and returning to her
mistress, told her, 'He would not receive the money, but gave it
back to me.' 'No matter,' answered Shams al-Nahar. As soon as the
slave-girl was gone" (continued the jeweller), "I arose and
betook myself to my other house and transported thither all that
was needful, by way of vessels and furniture and rich carpets;
and I did not forget china vases and cups of glass and gold and
silver; and I made ready meat and drink required for the
occasion. When the damsel came and saw what I had done, it
pleased her and she bade me fetch Ali bin Bakkar; but I said,
'None shall bring him save thou.' Accordingly she went to him and
brought him back perfectly dressed and looking his best. I met
him and greeted him and then seated him upon a divan befitting
his condition, and set before him sweet-scented flowers in vases
of china and vari-coloured glass. [FN#211] Then I set on a tray of
many-tinted meats such as broaden the breast with their sight,
and sat talking with him and diverting him, whilst the slave-girl
went away and was absent till after sundown-prayers, when she
returned with Shams al-Nahar, attended by two maids and none
else. Now as soon as she saw Ali bin Bakkar and he saw her, he
rose and embraced her, and she on her side embraced him and both
fell in a fit to the ground. They lay for a whole hour
insensible; then, coming to themselves, they began mutually to
complain of the pains of separation. Thereupon they drew near to
each other and sat talking charmingly, softly, tenderly; after
which they somewhat perfumed themselves and fell to thanking me
for what I had done for them. Quoth I, 'Have ye a mind for food?'
'Yes,' quoth they. So I set before them a small matter of food
and they ate till they were satisfied and then washed their
hands; after which I led them to another sitting-room and brought
them wine. So they drank and drank deep and inclined to each
other; and presently Shams al-Nahar said to me, 'O my master,
complete thy kindness by bringing us a lute or other instrument
of mirth and music that the measure of our joy may be fully
filled.' I replied, 'On my head and eyes!' and rising brought her
a lute, which she took and tuned; then laying it in her lap she
touched it with a masterly touch, at once exciting to sadness and
changing sorrow to gladness; after which she sang these two
couplets,

     'My sleeplessness would show I love to bide on wake; *
          And would my leanness prove that sickness is my make: 
     And tear-floods course adown the cheeks they only scald; *
          Would I knew union shall disunion overtake!'

Then she went on to sing the choicest and most affecting poesy to
many and various modes, till our senses were bewitched and the
very room danced with excess of delight and surprise at her sweet
singing; and neither thought nor reason was left in us. When we
had sat awhile and the cup had gone round amongst us, the damsel
took the lute and sang to a lively measure these couplets, 

'My love a meeting promised me and kept it faithfully, *
     One night as many I shall count in number and degree: 
O Night of joyance Fate vouchsafed to faithful lovers tway, *
     Uncaring for the railer loon and all his company! 
My lover lay the Night with me and clipt me with his right, *
     While I with left embraced him, a-faint for ecstasy; 
And hugged him to my breast and sucked the sweet wine of his
     lips, * Full savouring the honey-draught the honey-man sold
     to me.'

Whilst we were thus drowned in the sea of gladness" (continued
the jeweller) "behold, there came in to us a little maid
trembling and said, 'O my lady, look how you may go away for the
folk have found you out and have surrounded the house; and we
know not the cause of this!' When I heard her words, I arose
startled and lo! in rushed a slave-girl who cried, 'Calamity hath
come upon you.' At the same moment the door was burst open and
there rushed in upon us ten men masked in kerchiefs with hangers
in their hands and swords by their sides, and as many more behind
them. When I saw this, the world was straitened on me for all its
wideness, and I looked to the door but saw no issue; so I sprang
from the terrace into the house of one of my neighbours and there
hid myself. Thence I found that folk had entered my lodgings and
were making a mighty hubbub; and I concluded that the Caliph had
got wind of us and had sent his Chief of the Watch to seize us
and bring us before him. So I abode confounded and ceased not
remaining in my place, without any possibility of quitting it
till midnight. And presently the house-master arose, for he had
heard me moving, and he feared with exceeding great fear of me;
so he came forth from his room with drawn brand in hand and made
at me, saying, 'Who is this in my house?' Quoth I, 'I am thy
neighbour the jeweller;' and he knew me and retired. Then he
fetched a light and coming up to me, said, 'O my brother, indeed
that which hath befallen thee this night is no light matter to
me.' I replied, 'O my brother, tell me who was in my house and
entered it breaking in my door; for I fled to thee not knowing
what was to do.' He answered, 'Of a truth the robbers who
attacked our neighbours yesterday and slew such an one and took
his goods, saw thee on the same day bringing furniture into this
house; so they broke in upon thee and stole thy goods and slew
thy guests.' Then we arose" (pursued the jeweller), "I and he,
and repaired to my house, which we found empty without a stick
remaining in it; so I was confounded at the case and said to
myself, 'As for the gear I care naught about its loss, albeit I
borrowed part of the stuff from my friends and it hath come to
grief; yet is there no harm in that, for they know my excuse in
the plunder of my property and the pillage of my place. But as
for Ali bin Bakkar and the Caliph's favourite concubine, I fear
lest their case get bruited abroad and this cause the loss of my
life.' So I turned to my neighbour and said to him, 'Thou art my
brother and my neighbour and wilt cover my nakedness; what then
dost thou advise me to do?' The man answered, 'What I counsel
thee to do is to keep quiet and wait; for they who entered thy
house and took thy goods have murdered the best men of a party
from the palace of the Caliphate and have killed not a few of the
watchmen: the government officers and guards are now in quest of
them on every road and haply they will hit upon them, whereby thy
wish will come about without effort of thine.'" The jeweller
hearing these words returned to his other house, that wherein he
dwelt,--and Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Sixty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
jeweller heard these words he returned to his other house wherein
he dwelt, and said to himself, "Indeed this that hath befallen me
is what Abu al-Hasan feared and from which he fled to Bassorah.
And now I have fallen into it." Presently the pillage of his
pleasure-house was noised abroad among the folk, and they came to
him from all sides and places, some exulting in his misfortune
and others excusing him and condoling with his sorrow; whilst he
bewailed himself to them and for grief neither ate meat nor drank
drink. And as he sat, repenting him of what he had done, behold
one of his servants came in to him and said, "There is a person
at the door who asketh for thee; and I know him not." The
jeweller went forth to him and saluted him who was a stranger;
and the man whispered to him, "I have somewhat to say between our
two selves." Thereupon he brought him in and asked him, "What
hast thou to tell me?" Quoth the man, "Come with me to thine
other house;" and the jeweller enquired, "Dost thou then know my
other house?" Replied the other, "I know all about thee and I
know that also whereby Allah will dispel thy dolours." "So I said
to myself" (continued the jeweller) "'I will go with him whither
he will;' and went out and walked on till we came to my second
house; and when the man saw it he said to me, 'It is without door
or doorkeeper, and we cannot possibly sit in it; so come thou
with me to another place.' Then the man continued passing from
stead to stead (and I with him) till night overtook us. Yet I put
no question to him of the matter in hand and we ceased not to
walk on, till we reached the open country. He kept saying,
'Follow me,' and quickened his pace to a trot, whilst I trotted
after him heartening my heart to go on, until we reached the
river, where he took boat with me, and the boatman rowed us over
to the other bank. Then he landed from the boat and I landed
after him: and he took my hand and led me to a street which I had
never entered in all my days, nor do I know in what quarter it
was. Presently the man stopped at the door of a house, and
opening it entered and made me enter with him; after which he
locked the door with an iron padlock, [FN#212] and led me along
the vestibule, till he brought me in the presence of ten men who
were as though they were one and the same man; they being
brothers. We saluted them" (continued the jeweller) "and they
returned our greeting and bade us be seated; so we sat down. Now
I was like to die for excess of weariness; but they brought me
rose-water and sprinkled it on my face; after which they gave me
a sherbet to drink and set before me food whereof some of them
ate with me. Quoth I to myself, 'Were there aught harmful in the
food, they would not eat with me.' So I ate, and when we had
washed our hands, each of us returned to his place. Then they
asked me, 'Dost thou know us?' and I answered, 'No! nor in my
life have I ever seen you; nay, I know not even him who brought
me hither.' Said they, 'Tell us thy tidings and lie not at all.'
Replied I, 'Know then that my case is wondrous and my affair
marvellous; but wot ye anything about me?' They rejoined, 'Yes!
it was we took thy goods yesternight and carried off thy friend
and her who was singing to him.' Quoth I, 'Allah let down His
veil over you! Where be my friend and she who was singing to
him?' They pointed with their hands to one side and replied,
'Yonder, but, by Allah, O our brother, the secret of their case
is known to none save to thee, for from the time we brought the
twain hither up to this day, we have not looked upon them nor
questioned them of their condition, seeing them to be persons of
rank and dignity. Now this and this only it was that hindered our
killing them: so tell us the truth of their case and thou shalt
be assured of thy safety and of theirs.' When I heard this"
(continued the jeweller) "I almost died of fright and horror, and
I said to them, 'Know ye, O my brethren, that if generosity were
lost, it would not be found save with you; and had I a secret
which I feared to reveal, none but your breasts would conceal
it.' And I went on exaggerating their praises in this fashion,
till I saw that frankness and readiness to speak out would profit
me more than concealing facts; so I told them all that had
betided me to the very end of the tale. When they heard it, they
said, 'And is this young man Ali Bakkar-son and this lady Shams
al-Nahar?' I replied, 'Yes.' Now this was grievous to them and
they rose and made their excuses to the two and then they said to
me, 'Of what we took from thy house part is spent, but here is
what is left of it.' So speaking, they gave me back most of my
goods and they engaged to return them to their places in my
house, and to restore me the rest as soon as they could. My heart
was set at ease till they split into two parties, one with me and
the other against me; and we fared forth from that house and such
was my case. But as regards Ali bin Bakkar and Shams al-Nahar;
they were well-nigh dying for excess of fear, when I went up to
them and saluting them, asked, 'What happened to the damsel and
the two maids, and where be they gone?', and they answered only,
'We know nothing of them.' Then we walked on and stinted not till
we came to the river-bank where the barque lay; and we all
boarded it, for it was the same which had brought me over on the
day before. The boatman rowed us to the other side; but hardly
had we landed and taken seat on the bank to rest, when a troop of
horse swooped down on us like eagles and surrounded us on all
sides and places, whereupon the robbers with us sprang up in
haste like vultures, and the boat put back for them and took them
in and the boatman pushed off into mid-stream, leaving us on the
river bank, unable to move or to stand still. Then the chief
horseman said to us, 'Whence be ye!'; and we were perplexed for
an answer, but I said" (continued the jeweller), "'Those ye saw
with us are rogues; we know them not. As for us, we are singers,
and they intended taking us to sing for them, nor could we get
free of them, save by subtlety and soft words; so on this
occasion they let us go, their works being such as you have
seen.' But they looked at Shams al-Nahar and Ali bin Bakkar and
said to me, 'Thou hast not spoken sooth but, if thy tale be true,
tell us who ye are and whence ye are; and what be your place and
in what quarter you dwell.' I knew not what to answer them, but
Shams al-Nahar sprang up and approaching the Captain of the
horsemen spoke with him privily, whereupon he dismounted from his
steed and, setting her on horse-back, took the bridle and began
to lead his beast. And two of his men did the like with the
youth, Ali bin Bakkar, and it was the same with myself. The
Commandant of the troop ceased not faring on with us, till they
reached a certain part of the river bank, when he sang out in
some barbarous jargon [FN#213] and there came to us a number of
men with two boats. Then the Captain embarked us in one of them
(and he with us) whilst the rest of his men put off in the other,
and rowed on with us till we arrived at the palace of the
Caliphate where Shams al-Nahar landed. And all the while we
endured the agonies of death for excess of fear, and they ceased
not faring till they came to a place whence there was a way to
our quarter. Here we landed and walked on, escorted by some of
the horsemen, till we came to Ali bin Bakkar's house; and when we
entered it, our escort took leave of us and went their way. We
abode there, unable to stir from the place and not knowing the
difference between morning and evening; and in such case we
continued till the dawn of the next day. And when it was again
nightfall, I came to myself and saw Ali bin Bakkar and the women
and men of his household weeping over him, for he was stretched
out without sense or motion. Some of them came to me and
thoroughly arousing me said, 'Tell us what hath befallen our son
and say how came he in this plight?' Replied I, 'O folk, hearken
to me!'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Sixty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
jeweller answered them, "'O folk, hearken to my words and give me
no trouble and annoyance! but be patient and he will come to and
tell you his tale for himself.' And I was hard upon them and made
them afraid of a scandal between me and them, but as we were
thus, behold, Ali bin Bakkar moved on his carpet-bed, whereat his
friends rejoiced and the stranger folk withdrew from him; but his
people forbade me to go away. Then they sprinkled rose-water on
his face and he presently revived and sensed the air; whereupon
they questioned him of his case, and he essayed to answer them
but his tongue could not speak forthright and he signed to them
to let me go home. So they let me go, and I went forth hardly
crediting my escape and returned to my own house, supported by
two men. When my people saw me thus, they rose up and set to
shrieking and slapping their faces; but I signed to them with my
hand to be silent and they were silent. Then the two men went
their way and I threw myself down on my bed, where I lay the rest
of the night and awoke not till the forenoon, when I found my
people gathered round me and saying, 'What calamity befel thee,
and what evil with its mischief did fell thee?' Quoth I 'Bring me
somewhat to drink.' So they brought me drink, and I drank of it
what I would and said to them, 'What happened, happened.'
Thereupon they went away and I made my excuses to my friends, and
asked if any of the goods that had been stolen from my other
house had been returned. They answered, 'Yes! some of them have
come back; by token that a man entered and threw them down within
the doorway and we saw him not.' So I comforted myself and abode
in my place two days, unable to rise and leave it; and presently
I took courage and went to the bath, for I was worn out with
fatigue and troubled in mind for Ali bin Bakkar and Shams
al-Nahar, because I had no news of them all this time and could
neither get to Ali's house nor, out of fear for my life, take my
rest in mine own. And I repented to Almighty Allah of what I had
done and praised Him for my safety. Presently my fancy suggested
to me to go to such and such a place and see the folk and solace
myself; so I went on foot to the cloth-market and sat awhile with
a friend of mine there. When I rose to go, I saw a woman standing
over against me; so I looked at her, and lo! it was Shams
al-Nahar's slave-girl. When I saw her, the world grew dark in my
eyes and I hurried on. She followed me, but I was seized with
affright and fled from her, and whenever I looked at her, a
trembling came upon me whilst she pursued me, saying. 'Stop, that
I may tell thee somewhat!' But I heeded her not and never ceased
walking till I reached a mosque, and she entered after me. I
prayed a two-bow prayer, after which I turned to her and,
sighing, said, 'What cost thou want?' She asked me how I did, and
I told her all that had befallen myself and Ali bin Bakkar and
besought her for news of herself. She answered, 'Know that when I
saw the robbers break open thy door and rush in, I was in sore
terror, for I doubted not but that they were the Caliph's
officers and would seize me and my mistress and we should perish
forthwith: so we fled over the roofs, I and the maids; and,
casting ourselves down from a high place, came upon some people
with whom we took refuge; and they received us and brought us to
the palace of the Caliphate, where we arrived in the sorriest of
plights. We concealed our case and abode on coals of fire till
nightfall, when I opened the river-gate and, calling the boatman
who had carried us the night before, said to him, 'I know not
what is become of my mistress; so take me in the boat, that we
may go seek her on the river: haply I shall chance on some news
of her. Accordingly he took me into the boat and went about with
me and ceased not wending till midnight, when I spied a barque
making towards the water gate, with one man rowing and another
standing up and a woman lying prostrate between them twain. And
they rowed on till they reached the shore when the woman landed,
and I looked at her, and behold, it was Shams al-Nahar. Thereupon
I got out and joined her, dazed for joy to see her after having
lost all hopes of finding her alive.'" --And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Sixty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
slave-girl went on telling the jeweller, "'I was dazed for joy to
see her, after having lost all hopes of finding her alive. When I
came up to her, she bade me give the man who had brought her
thither a thousand gold pieces; and we carried her in, I and the
two maids, and laid her on her bed; where she passed that night
in a sorely troubled state; and, when morning dawned, I forbade
the women and eunuchs to go in to her, or even to draw near her
for the whole of that day; but on the next she revived and
somewhat recovered and I found her as if she had come out of her
grave. I sprinkled rose-water upon her face and changed her
clothes and washed her hands and feet; nor did I cease to coax
her, till I brought her to eat a little and drink some wine,
though she had no mind to any such matter. As soon as she had
breathed the fresh air and strength began to return to her, I
took to upbraiding her, saying, 'O my lady, consider and have
pity on thyself; thou seest what hath betided us: surely, enough
and more than enough of evil hath befallen thee; for indeed thou
hast been nigh upon death. She said, 'By Allah, O good damsel, in
sooth death were easier to me than what hath betided me; for it
seemed as though I should be slain and no power could save me.
When the robbers took us from the jeweller's house they asked me,
Who mayest thou be? and hearing my answer, 'I am a singing girl,
they believed me. Then they turned to Ali bin Bakkar and made
enquiries about him, 'And who art thou and what is thy
condition?; whereto he replied, 'I am of the common kind. So they
took us and carried us along, without our resisting, to their
abode; and we hurried on with them for excess of fear; but when
they had us set down with them in the house, they looked hard at
me and seeing the clothes I wore and my necklaces and jewellery,
believed not my account of myself and said to me, 'Of a truth
these necklaces belong to no singing-girl; so be soothfast and
tell us the truth of thy case. I returned them no answer
whatever, saying in my mind, 'Now will they slay me for the sake
of my apparel and ornaments; and I spoke not a word. Then the
villains turned to Ali bin Bakkar, asking, 'And thou, who art
thou and whence art thou? for thy semblance seemeth not as that
of the common kind. But he was silent and we ceased not to keep
our counsel and to weep, till Allah softened the rogues' hearts
to pity and they said to us, 'Who is the owner of the house
wherein we were?' We answered, 'Such an one, the jeweller;
whereupon quoth one of them, 'I know him right well and I wot the
other house where he liveth and I will engage to bring him to you
this very hour. Then they agreed to set me in a place by myself
and Ali bin Bakkar in a place by himself, and said to us, 'Be at
rest ye twain and fear not lest your secret be divulged; ye are
safe from us. Meanwhile their comrade went away and returned with
the jeweller, who made known to them our case, and we joined
company with him; after which a man of the band fetched a barque,
wherein they embarked us all three and, rowing us over the river,
landed us with scant ceremony on the opposite bank and went their
ways. Thereupon up came a horse-patrol and asked us who we were;
so I spoke with the Captain of the watch and said to him, 'I am
Shams al-Nahar, the Caliph's favourite; I had drunken strong wine
and went out to visit certain of my acquaintance of the wives of
the Wazirs, when yonder rogues came upon me and laid hold of me
and brought me to this place; but when they saw you, they fled as
fast as they could. I met these men with them: so do thou escort
me and them to a place of safety and I will requite thee as I am
well able to do. When the Captain of the watch heard my speech,
he knew me and alighting, mounted me on his horse; and in like
manner did two of his men with Ali bin Bakkar. So I spoke to her'
(continued the handmaid) 'and blamed her doings, and bade her
beware, and said to her, 'O my lady, have some care for thy
life!' But she was angered at my words and cried out at me;
accordingly I left her and came forth in quest of thee, but found
thee not and dared not go to the house of Ali bin Bakkar; so
stood watching for thee, that I might ask thee of him and wot how
it goes with him. And I pray thee, of thy favour, to take of me
some money, for thou hast doubtless borrowed from thy friends
part of the gear and as it is lost, it behoveth thee to make it
good with folk.' I replied, 'To hear is to obey! go on;' and I
walked with her till we drew near my house, when she said to me,
'Wait here till I come back to thee.'"--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that after the
slave-girl had addressed the jeweller, "'Wait here till I come
back to thee!' she went away and presently returned with the
money, which she put" (continued the jeweller) "into my hand,
saying, 'O my master, in what place shall we meet?' Quoth I, 'I
will start and go to my house at once and suffer hard things for
thy sake and contrive how thou mayst win access to him, for such
access is difficult at this present.' Said she, 'Let me know some
spot, where I shall come to thee,' and I answered, 'In my other
house, I will go thither forthright and have the doors mended and
the place made safe again, and henceforth we will meet there.'
Then she took leave of me and went her way, whilst I carried the
money home, and counting it, found it five thousand dinars. So I
gave my people some of it and to all who had lent me aught I made
good their loss, after which I arose and took my servants and
repaired to my other house whence the things had been stolen; and
I brought builders and carpenters and masons who restored it to
its former state. Moreover, I placed my negress-slave there and
forgot the mishaps which had befallen me. Then I fared forth and
repaired to Ali bin Bakkar's house and, when I reached it, his
slave-servants accosted me, saying, 'Our lord calleth for thee
night and day, and hath promised to free whichever of us bringeth
thee to him; so they have been wandering about in quest of thee
everywhere but knew not in what part to find thee. Our master is
by way of recovering strength, but at times he reviveth and at
times he relapseth; and whenever he reviveth he nameth thee, and
saith, 'Needs must ye bring him to me, though but for the
twinkling of an eye;' and then he sinketh back into his torpor.'
Accordingly" (continued the jeweller) "I accompanied the slave
and went in to Ali bin Bakkar; and, finding him unable to speak,
sat down at his head, whereupon he opened his eyes and seeing me,
wept and said, 'Welcome and well come!' I raised him and making
him sit up, strained him to my bosom, and he said, 'Know, O my
brother, that, from the hour I took to my bed, I have not sat up
till now: praise to Allah that I see thee again!' And I ceased
not to prop him and support him until I made him stand on his
feet and walk a few steps, after which I changed his clothes and
he drank some wine: but all this he did for my satisfaction.
Then, seeing him somewhat restored, I told him what had befallen
me with the slave-girl (none else hearing me), and said to him,
'Take heart and be of good courage, I know what thou sufferest.'
He smiled and I added, 'Verily nothing shall betide thee save
what shall rejoice thee and medicine thee.' Thereupon he called
for food, which being brought, he signed to his pages, and they
withdrew. Then quoth he to me, 'O my brother, hast thou seen what
hath befallen me?'; and he made excuses to me and asked how I had
fared all that while. I told him everything that had befallen me,
from beginning to end, whereat he wondered and calling his
servants, said, 'Bring me such and such things.' They brought in
fine carpets and hangings and, besides that, vessels of gold and
silver, more than I had lost, and he gave them all to me; so I
sent them to my house and abode with him that night. When the day
began to yellow, he said to me, 'Know thou that as to all things
there is an end, so the end of love is either death or
accomplishment of desire. I am nearer unto death, would I had
died ere this befel!; and had not Allah favoured us, we had been
found out and put to shame. And now I know not what shall deliver
me from this my strait, and were it not that I fear Allah, I
would hasten my own death; for know, O my brother, that I am like
bird in cage and that my life is of a surety perished, choked by
the distresses which have befallen me; yet hath it a period
stablished firm and an appointed term.' And he wept and groaned
and began repeating,

     'Enough of tears hath shed the lover-wight, *
          When grief outcast all patience from his sprite: 
     He hid the secrets which united us, *
          But now His eye parts what He did unite!'"

When he had finished his verses, the jeweller said to him, "O my
lord, I now intend returning to my house." He answered, "There be
no harm in that; go and come back to me with news as fast as
possible, for thou seest my case." "So I took leave of him"
(continued the jeweller) "and went home, and hardly had I sat
down, when up came the damsel, choked with long weeping. I asked,
'What is the matter'?; and she answered, 'O my lord, know then
that what we feared hath befallen us; for, when I left thee
yesterday and returned to my lady, I found her in a fury with one
of the two maids who were with us the other night, and she
ordered her to be beaten. The girl was frightened and ran away;
but, as she was leaving the house, one of the door-porters and
guards of the gate met her and took her up and would have sent
her back to her mistress. However, she let fall some hints, which
were a disclosure to him; so he cajoled her and led her on to
talk, and she tattled about our case and let him know of all our
doings. This affair came to the ears of the Caliph, who bade
remove my mistress, Shams al-Nahar, and all her gear to the
palace of the Caliphate; and set over her a guard of twenty
eunuchs. Since then to the present hour he hath not visited her
nor hath given her to know the reason of his action, but I
suspect this to be the cause; wherefore I am in fear for my life
and am sore troubled, O my lord, knowing not what I shall do, nor
with what contrivance I shall order my affair and hers; for she
hath none by her more trusted or more trustworthy than
myself.'"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Sixty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
slave-girl thus addressed the jeweller, "'And in very sooth my
lady hath none by her more trusted or more trustworthy in matter
of secrecy than myself. So go thou, O my master, and speed thee
without delay to Ali bin Bakkar; and acquaint him with this, that
he may be on his guard and ward; and, if the affair be
discovered, we will cast about for some means whereby to save our
lives.' On this" (continued the jeweller), "I was seized with
sore trouble and the world grew dark in my sight for the
slave-girl's words; and when she was about to wend, I said to
her, 'What reckest thou and what is to be done?' Quoth she, 'My
counsel is that thou hasten to Ali bin Bakkar, if thou be indeed
his friend and desire to save him; thine be it to carry him this
news at once without aught of stay and delay, or regard for far
and near; and mine be it to sniff about for further news.' Then
she took her leave of me and went away: so I rose and followed
her track and, betaking myself to Ali bin Bakkar, found him
flattering himself with impossible expectations. When he saw me
returning to him so soon, he said, 'I see thou hast come back to
me forthwith and only too soon.' I answered, 'Patience, and cut
short this foolish connection and shake off the pre-occupation
wherein thou art, for there hath befallen that which may bring
about the loss of thy life and good.' Now when he heard this, he
was troubled and strongly moved; and he said to me, 'O my
brother, tell me what hath happened.' Replied I, 'O my lord, know
that such and such things have happened and thou art lost without
recourse, if thou abide in this thy house till the end of the
day.' At this, he was confounded and his soul well-nigh departed
his body, but he recovered himself and said to me, 'What shall I
do, O my brother, and what counsel hast thou to offer.' Answered
I, 'My advice is that thou take what thou canst of thy property
and whom of thy slaves thou trustest, and flee with us to a land
other than this, ere this very day come to an end.' And he said,
'I hear and I obey.' So he rose, confused and dazed like one in
epilepsy, now walking and now falling, and took what came under
his hand. Then he made an excuse to his household and gave them
his last injunctions, after which he loaded three camels and
mounted his beast; and I did likewise. We went forth privily in
disguise and fared on and ceased not our wayfare the rest of that
day and all its night, till nigh upon morning, when we unloaded
and, hobbling our camels, lay down to sleep. But we were worn
with fatigue and we neglected to keep watch, so that there fell
upon us robbers, who stripped us of all we had and slew our
slaves, when these would have beaten them off, leaving us naked
and in the sorriest of plights, after they had taken our money
and lifted our beasts and disappeared. As soon as they were gone,
we arose and walked on till morning dawned, when we came to a
village which we entered, and finding a mosque took refuge
therein for we were naked. So we sat in a corner all that day and
we passed the next night without meat or drink; and at day-break
we prayed our dawn-prayer and sat down again. Presently behold, a
man entered and saluting us prayed a two-bow prayer, after which
he turned to us and said, 'O folk, are ye strangers?' We replied,
'Yes: the bandits waylaid us and stripped us naked, and we came
to this town but know none here with whom we may shelter.' Quoth
he, 'What say ye? will you come home with me?' And" (pursued the
jeweller) "I said to Ali bin Bakkar, 'Up and let us go with him,
and we shall escape two evils; the first, our fear lest some one
who knoweth us enter this mosque and recognise us, so that we
come to disgrace; and the second, that we are strangers and have
no place wherein to lodge.' And he answered helplessly, 'As thou
wilt.' Then the man said to us again, 'O ye poor folk, give ear
unto me and come with me to my place,' and I replied, 'Hearkening
and obedience;' whereupon he pulled off a part of his own clothes
and covered us therewith and made his excuses to us and spoke
kindly to us. Then we arose and accompanied him to his house and
he knocked at the door, whereupon a little slave-boy came out and
opened to us. The host entered and we followed him; [FN#214] when
he called for a bundle of clothes and muslins for turbands, and
gave us each a suit and a piece; so we dressed and turbanded
ourselves and sat us down. Presently, in came a damsel with a
tray of food and set it before us, saying, 'Eat.' We ate some
small matter and she took away the tray: after which we abode
with our host till nightfall, when Ali bin Bakkar sighed and said
to me, 'Know, O my brother, that I am a dying man past hope of
life and I would charge thee with a charge: it is that, when thou
seest me dead, thou go to my parent [FN#215] and tell her of my
decease and bid her come hither that she may be here to receive
the visits of condolence and be present at the washing of my
corpse, and do thou exhort her to bear my loss with patience.'
Then he fell down in a fainting fit and, when he recovered he
heard a damsel singing afar off and making verses as she sang.
Thereupon he addressed himself to give ear to her and hearken to
her voice; and now he was insensible, absent from the world, and
now he came to himself; and anon he wept for grief and mourning
at the love which had befallen him. Presently, he heard the
damsel who was singing repeat these couplets,

     'Parting ran up to part from lover-twain *
          Free converse, perfect concord, friendship fain: 
     The Nights with shifting drifted us apart, *
          Would heaven I wot if we shall meet again: 
     How bitter after meeting 'tis to part, *
          May lovers ne'er endure so bitter pain!
     Death-grip, death-choke, lasts for an hour and ends, *
          But parting-tortures aye in heart remain: 
     Could we but trace where Parting's house is placed, *
          We would make Parting eke of parting taste!'

When Ali son of Bakkar heard the damsel's song, he sobbed one sob
and his soul quitted his body. As soon as I saw that he was dead"
(continued the jeweller), "I committed his corpse to the care of
the house-master and said to him 'Know thou, that I am going to
Baghdad, to tell his mother and kinsfolk, that they may come
hither and conduct his burial.' So I betook myself to Baghdad
and, going to my house, changed my clothes; after which I
repaired to Ali bin Bakkar's lodging. Now when his servants saw
me, they came to me and questioned me of him, and I bade them ask
permission for me to go in to his mother. She gave me leave; so I
entered and saluting her, said, 'Verily Allah ordereth the lives
of all creatures by His commandment and when He decreeth aught,
there is no escaping its fulfilment; nor can any soul depart but
by leave of Allah, according to the Writ which affirmeth the
appointed term.' [FN#216] She guessed by these words that her son
was dead and wept with sore weeping, then she said to me, 'Allah
upon thee! tell me, is my son dead?' I could not answer her for
tears and excess of grief, and when she saw me thus, she was
choked with weeping and fell to the ground in a fit. As soon as
she came to herself she said to me, 'Tell me how it was with my
son.' I replied, 'May Allah abundantly compensate thee for his
loss!' and I told her all that had befallen him from beginning to
end. She then asked, 'Did he give thee any charge?'; and I
answered, 'Yes,' and told her what he had said, adding, 'Hasten
to perform his funeral.' When she heard these words, she swooned
away again; and, when she recovered, she addressed herself to do
as I charged her. Then I returned to my house; and as I went
along musing sadly upon the fair gifts of his youth, behold, a
woman caught hold of my hand;"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Sixty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
jeweller thus continued:--"A woman caught hold of my hand; and I
looked at her and lo! it was the slave-girl who used to come from
Shams al-Nahar, and she seemed broken by grief. When we knew each
other we both wept and ceased not weeping till we reached my
house, and I said to her, 'Knowest thou the news of the youth,
Ali bin Bakkar?' She replied, 'No, by Allah!'; so I told her the
manner of his death and all that had passed, whilst we both wept;
after which quoth I to her, 'How is it with thy mistress?' Quoth
she, 'The Commander of the Faithful would not hear a single word
against her; but, for the great love he bore her, saw all her
actions in a favourable light, and said to her, 'O Shams
al-Nahar, thou art dear to me and I will bear with thee and bring
the noses of thy foes to the grindstone. Then he bade them
furnish her an apartment decorated with gold and a handsome
sleeping-chamber, and she abode with him in all ease of life and
high favour. Now it came to pass that one day, as he sat at wine
according to his custom, with his favourite concubines in
presence, he bade them be seated in their several ranks and made
Shams al-Nahar sit by his side. But her patience had failed and
her disorder had redoubled upon her. Then he bade one of the
damsels sing: so she took a lute and tuning it struck the chords,
and began to sing these verses,

'One craved my love and I gave all he craved of me, *
     And tears on cheek betray how 'twas I came to yield: 
Tear-drops, meseemeth, are familiar with our case, *
     Revealing what I hide, hiding what I revealed: 
How can I hope in secret to conceal my love, *
     Which stress of passion ever showeth unconcealed: 
Death, since I lost my lover, is grown sweet to me; *
     Would I knew what their joys when I shall quit the field!

Now when Shams al-Nahar heard these verses sung by the
slave-girl, she could not keep her seat; but fell down in a
fainting-fit whereupon the Caliph cast the cup from his hand and
drew her to him crying out; and the damsels also cried out, and
the Prince of True Believers turned her over and shook her, and
lo and behold! she was dead. The Caliph grieved over her death
with sore grief and bade break all the vessels and
dulcimers [FN#217] and other instruments of mirth and music which
were in the room; then carrying her body to his closet, he abode
with her the rest of the night. When the day broke, he laid her
out and commanded to wash her and shroud her and bury her. And he
mourned for her with sore mourning, and questioned not of her
case nor of what caused her condition. And I beg thee in Allah's
name' (continued the damsel) 'to let me know the day of the
coming of Ali bin Bakkar's funeral procession that I may be
present at his burial.' Quoth I, 'For myself, where thou wilt
thou canst find me; but thou, where art thou to be found, and who
can come at thee where thou art?' She replied, 'On the day of
Shams al-Nahar's death, the Commander of the Faithful freed all
her women, myself among the rest; [FN#218] and I am one of those
now abiding at the tomb in such a place.' So I rose and
accompanied her to the burial-ground and piously visited Shams
al-Nahar's tomb; after which I went my way and ceased not to
await the coming of Ali bin Bakkar's funeral. When it arrived,
the people of Baghdad went forth to meet it and I went forth with
them: and I saw the damsel among the women and she the loudest of
them in lamentation, crying out and wailing with a voice that
rent the vitals and made the heart ache. Never was seen in
Baghdad a finer funeral than his; and we ceased not to follow in
crowds till we reached the cemetery and buried him to the mercy
of Almighty Allah; nor from that time to this have I ceased to
visit the tombs of Ali son of Bakkar and of Shams al-Nahar. This,
then, is their story, and Allah Almighty have mercy upon
them!" [FN#219] And yet is not their tale (continued Shahrazad)
more wonderful than that of King Shahriman. The King asked her
"And what was his tale?"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the One Hundred and Seventieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, as regards the






                    TALE OF KAMAR AL ZAMAN, 
                                
                                
                                
That there was in times of yore and in ages long gone before a
King called Shahriman, [FN#220] who was lord of many troops and
guards, and officers, and who reigned over certain islands, known
as the Khalidan Islands, [FN#221] on the borders of the land of
the Persians. But he was stricken in years and his bones were
wasted, without having been blessed with a son, albeit he had
four wives, daughters of Kings, and threescore concubines, with
each of whom he was wont to lie one night in turn. [FN#222]  This
preyed upon his mind and disquieted him, so that he complained
thereof to one of his Wazirs, saying, "Verily I fear lest my
kingdom be lost when I die, for that I have no son to succeed
me." The Minister answered, "O King, peradventure Allah shall yet
bring something to pass; so rely upon the Almighty and be instant
in prayer. It is also my counsel that thou spread a banquet and
invite to it the poor and needy, and let them eat of thy food;
and supplicate the Lord to vouchsafe thee a son; for perchance
there may be among thy guests a righteous soul whose prayers find
acceptance; and thereby thou shalt win thy wish." So the King
rose, made the lesser ablution, and prayed a two-bow
prayer, [FN#223] then he cried upon Allah with pure intention;
after which he called his chief wife to bed and lay with her
forthright. By grace of God she conceived and, when her months
were accomplished, she bore a male child, like the moon on the
night of fulness. The King named him Kamar al-Zaman, [FN#224] and
rejoiced in him with extreme joy and bade the city be dressed out
in his honour; so they decorated the streets seven days, whilst
the drums beat and the messengers bore the glad tidings abroad.
Then wet and dry nurses were provided for the boy and he was
reared in splendour and delight, until he reached the age of
fifteen. He grew up of surpassing beauty and seemlihead and
symmetry, and his father loved him so dear that he could not
brook to be parted from him day or night. One day he complained
to a certain of his Ministers anent the excess of his love for
his only child, saying, "O thou the Wazir, of a truth I fear for
my son, Kamar al-Zaman, the shifts and accidents which befal man
and fain would I marry him in my life-time." Answered the Wazir,
"O King, know thou that marriage is one of the most honourable of
moral actions, and thou wouldst indeed do well and right to marry
thy son in thy lifetime, ere thou make him Sultan." On this quoth
the King, "Hither with my son Kamar al-Zaman;" so he came and
bowed his head to the ground in modesty before his sire. "O Kamar
al Zaman," said King Shahriman, "of a truth I desire to marry
thee and rejoice in thee during my lifetime." Replied he, "O my
father, know that I have no lust to marry nor cloth my soul
incline to women; for that concerning their craft and perfidy I
have read many books and heard much talk, even as saith the poet,

'Now, an of women ask ye, I reply:--*
     In their affairs I'm versed a doctor rare!
When man's head grizzles and his money dwindles, *
     In their affections he hath naught for share.'

And another said:--

'Rebel against women and so shalt thou serve Allah the more; *
     The youth who gives women the rein must forfeit all hope to
     soar.
They'll baulk him when seeking the strange device, Excelsior, *
     Tho' waste he a thousand of years in the study of science
     and lore.' "

And when he had ended his verses he continued, "O my father,
wedlock is a thing whereto I will never consent; no, not though I
drink the cup of death." When Sultan Shahriman heard these words
from his son, light became darkness in his sight and he grieved
thereat with great grief.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Seventy-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King
Shahriman heard these words from his son, the light became
darkness in his sight and he grieved over his son's lack of
obedience to his directions in the matter of marriage; yet, for
the great love he bore him, he was unwilling to repeat his wishes
and was not wroth with him, but caressed him and spake him fair
and showed him all manner of kindness such as tendeth to induce
affection. All this, and Kamar al-Zaman increased daily in beauty
and loveliness and amorous grace; and the King bore with him for
a whole year till he became perfect in eloquence and elegant wit.
All men were ravished with his charms; and every breeze that blew
bore the tidings of his gracious favour; his fair sight was a
seduction to the loving and a garden of delight to the longing,
for he was honey-sweet of speech and the sheen of his face shamed
the full moon; he was a model of symmetry and blandishment and
engaging ways; his shape was as the willow-wand or the rattan-
cane and his cheeks might take the place of rose or red anemone.
He was, in fine the pink of perfection, even as the poet hath
said of him,

"He came and cried they, 'Now be Allah blest! *
     Praise Him that clad that soul in so fair vest!'
He's King of Beauty where the beauteous be; *
     All are his Ryots, [FN#225] all obey his hest:
His lip-dew's sweeter than the virgin honey; *
     His teeth are pearls in double row close press:
All charms are congregate in him alone, *
     And deals his loveliness to man unrest.
Beauty wrote on those cheeks for worlds to see *
     'I testify there is none good but He.'" [FN#226]

When the year came to an end, the King called his son to him and
said, "O my son, wilt thou not hearken to me?" Whereupon Kamar
al-Zaman fell down for respect and shame before his sire and
replied, "O my father, how should I not hearken to thee, seeing
that Allah commandeth me to obey thee and not gain-say thee?"
Rejoined King Shahriman, "O my son, know that I desire to marry
thee and rejoice in thee whilst yet I live, and make thee King
over my realm, before my death." When the Prince heard his sire
pronounce these words he bowed his head awhile, then raised it
and said, "O my father, this is a thing which I will never do;
no, not though I drink the cup of death! I know of a surety that
the Almighty hath made obedience to thee a duty in religion; but,
Allah upon thee! press me not in this matter of marriage, nor
fancy that I will ever marry my life long; for that I have read
the books both of the ancients and the moderns, and have come to
know all the mischiefs and miseries which have befallen them
through women and their endless artifices. And how excellent is
the saying of the poet,
  
'He whom the randy motts entrap *
     Shall never see deliverance!
Though build he forts a thousand-fold, *
     Whose mighty strength lead-plates enhance, [FN#227]
Their force shall be of no avail; *
     These fortresses have not a chance!
Women aye deal in treachery *
     To far and near o'er earth's expanse
With fingers dipt in Henna-blood *
     And locks in braids that mad the glance;
And eyelids painted o'er with Kohl *
     They gar us drink of dire mischance.'

And how excellently saith another,

'Women, for all the chastity they claim, *
     Are offal cast by kites where'er they list:
This night their talk and secret charms are shine, *
     That night another joyeth calf and wrist:
Like inn, whence after night thou far'st at dawn, *
     And lodges other wight thou hast not wist.'" [FN#228]

Now when King Shahriman heard these his son's words and learnt
the import of his verses and poetical quotations, he made no
answer, of his excessive love for him, but redoubled in
graciousness and kindness to him. He at once broke up the
audience and, as soon as the seance was over, he summoned his
Minister and taking him apart, said to him, "O thou the Wazir!
tell me how I shall deal with my son in the matter of marriage."-
-And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted stay.

     When it was the One Hundred and Seventy-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King
summoned his Minister; and, taking him apart, said to him, "O
thou the Wazir, tell me what I shall do with my son in the matter
of marriage. Of a truth I took counsel with thee thereon and thou
didst counsel me to marry him, before making him King. I have
spoken with him of wedlock time after time and he still gainsaid
me; so do thou, O Wazir, forthright advise me what to do."
Answered the Minister, "O King, wait another year and, if after
that thou be minded to speak to him on the matter of marriage,
speak not to him privily, but address him on a day of state, when
all the Emirs and Wazirs are present with the whole of the army
standing before thee. And when all are in crowd then send for thy
son, Kamar al-Zaman, and summon him; and, when he cometh, broach
to him the matter of marriage before the Wazirs and Grandees and
Officers of state and Captains; for he will surely be bashful and
daunted by their presence and will not dare to oppose thy will."
Now when King Shahriman heard his Wazir's words, he rejoiced with
exceeding joy, seeing success in the project, and bestowed on him
a splendid robe of honour. Then he took patience with his son
another year, whilst, with every day that passed over him, Kamar
al-Zaman increased in beauty and loveliness, and elegance and
perfect grace, till he was nigh twenty years old. Indeed Allah
had clad him in the cloak of comeliness and had crowned him with
the crown of completion: his eye-glance was more bewitching than
Harut and Marut [FN#229] and the play of his luring looks more
misleading than Taghut; [FN#230] and his cheeks shone like the
dawn rosy-red and his eyelashes stormed the keen-edged blade: the
whiteness of his brow resembled the moon shining bright, and the
blackness of his locks was as the murky night; and his waist was
more slender than the gossamer [FN#231]  and his back parts than
two sand heaps bulkier, making a Babel of the heart with their
softness; but his waist complained of the weight of his hips and
loins; and his charms ravished all mankind, even as one of the
poets saith in these couplets,

"By his eyelash tendril curled, by his slender waist I swear,
By the dart his witchery feathers, fatal hurtling through the
     air;
By the just roundness of his shape, by his glances bright and
     keen
By the swart limping of his locks, and his fair forehead shining
     sheen;
By his eyebrows which deny that she who looks on them should
     sleep,
Which now commanding, now forbidding, o'er me high dominion keep;
By the roses of his cheek, his face as fresh as myrtle wreath
His tulip lips, and those pure pearls that hold the places of his
     teeth;
By his noble form, which rises featly turned in even swell
To where upon his jutting chest two young pomegranates seem to
     dwell
By his supple moving hips, his taper waist, the silky skin,
By all he robbed Perfection of, and holds enchained his form
     within;
By his tongue of steadfastness, his nature true, and excellent,
By the greatness of his rank, his noble birth, and high descent,
Musk from my love her savour steals, who musk exhales from every
     limb
And all the airs ambergris breathes are but the Zephyr's blow
     o'er him.
The sun, methinks, the broad bright sun, as low before my love
     should quail
As would my love himself transcend the paltry paring of his
     nail!" [FN#232]

So King Shahriman, having accepted the counsel of his Wazir,
waited for another year and a great festival,--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Seventy-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Shahriman
having accepted the counsel of his Wazir, waited for another year
and a great festival, a day of state when the audience hall was
filled with his Emirs and Wazirs and Grandees of his reign and
Officers of State and Captains of might and main. Thereupon he
sent for his son Kamar al-Zaman who came, and kissing the ground
before him three times, stood in presence of his sire with his
hands behind his back the right grasping the left. [FN#233]  Then
said the King to him, "Know O my son, that I have not sent for
thee on this occasion and summoned thee to appear before this
assembly and all these officers of estate here awaiting our
orders save and except that I may lay a commandment on thee,
wherein do thou not disobey me; and my commandment is that thou
marry, for I am minded to wed thee to a King's daughter and
rejoice in thee ere I die." When the Prince heard this much from
his royal sire, he bowed his head groundwards awhile, then
raising it towards his father and being moved thereto at that
time by youthful folly and boyish ignorance, replied, "But for
myself I will never marry; no, not though I drink the cup of
death! As for thee, thou art great in age and small of wit: hast
thou not, twice ere this day and before this occasion, questioned
me of the matter of marriage and I refused my consent? Indeed
thou dotest and are not fit to govern a flock of sheep!" So
saying Kamar al-Zaman unclasped his hands from behind his back
and tucked up his sleeves above his elbows before his father,
being in a fit of fury; moreover, he added many words to his
sire, knowing not what he said in the trouble of his spirits. The
King was confounded and ashamed, for that this befel in the
presence of his grandees and soldier-officers assembled on a high
festival and a state occasion; but presently the majesty of
Kingship took him, and he cried out at his son and made him
tremble. Then he called to the guards standing  before him and
said, "Seize him!' So they came forward and laid hands on him
and, binding him, brought him before his sire, who bade them
pinion his elbows behind his back and in this guise make him
stand before the presence. And the Prince bowed down  his head
for fear and apprehension, and his brow and face were beaded and
spangled with sweat; and shame and confusion troubled him sorely.
Thereupon his father abused him and reviled him and cried, "Woe
to thee, thou son of adultery and nursling of
abomination! [FN#234]  How durst thou answer me on this wise
before my captains and soldiers? But hitherto none hath chastised
thee,"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

     When it was the One Hundred and Seventy-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King
Shahriman cried out to his son Kamar al-Zaman, "How durst thou
answer me on this wise before my captains and soldiers? But
hitherto none hath chastised thee. Knowest thou not that this
deed thou hast done were a disgrace to him had it been done by
the meanest of my subjects?" And the King commanded his Mamelukes
to loose his elbow bonds and imprison him in one of the bastions
of the citadel. So they took the Prince and thrust him into an
old tower, wherein there was a dilapidated saloon and in its
middle a ruined well, after having first swept it and cleansed
its floor-flags and set therein a couch on which they laid a
mattress, a leathern rug and a cushion; and then they brought a
great lanthorn and a wax candle, for that place was dark, even by
day. And lastly the Mamelukes led Kamar al-Zaman thither, and
stationed an eunuch at the door. And when all this was done, the
Prince threw himself on the couch, sad-spirited, and heavy-
hearted; blaming himself and repenting of his injurious conduct
to his father, whenas repentance availed him naught, and saying,
"Allah curse marriage and marriageable and married women, the
traitresses all! Would I had hearkened to my father and accepted
a wife! Had I so done it had been better for me than this jail."
This is how it fared with him; but as regards King Shahri man, he
remained seated on his throne all through the day until sundown;
then he took the Minister apart and said to him "Know thou, O
Wazir, that thou and thou only west the cause of all this that
hath come to pass between me and my son by the advice thou west
pleased to devise; and so what dost thou counsel me to do now?"
Answered he, "O King, leave thy son in limbo for the space of
fifteen days: then summon him to thy presence and bid him wed;
and assuredly he shall not gainsay thee again."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Seventy-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir,
said to King Shahriman, "Leave thy son in limbo for the space of
fifteen days; then summon him to thy presence and bid him wed;
and assuredly he shall not gainsay thee again." The King accepted
the Wazir's opinion and lay down to sleep that night troubled at
heart concerning his son; for he loved him with dearest love
because he had no other child but this; and it was his wont every
night not to sleep, save after placing his arm under his son's
neck. So he passed that night in trouble and unease on the Prince
's account, tossing from side to side, as he were laid on coals
of Artemisia-wood [FN#235]: for he was overcome with doubts and
fears and sleep visited him not all that livelong night; but his
eyes ran  over with tears and he began repeating, ;

"While slanderers slumber, longsome is my night; *
     Suffice thee a heart so sad in parting-plight;
I say, while night in care slow moments by, *
     'What! no return for thee, fair morning light?'"

And the saying of another,

"When saw I Pleiad-stars his glance escape *
     And Pole star draught of sleep upon him pour;
And the Bier-daughters [FN#236] wend in mourning dight, *
     I knew that morning was for him no more!"

Such was the case with King Shahriman; but as regards Kamar al-
Zaman, when the night came upon him the eunuch set the lanthorn
before him and lighting the wax-candle, placed it in the
candlestick; then brought him somewhat of food. The Prince ate a
little and continually reproached himself for his unseemly
treatment of his father, saying to himself, "O my soul, knowest
thou not that a son of Adam is the hostage of his tongue, and
that a man's tongue is what casteth him into deadly perils?" Then
his eyes ran over with tears and he bewailed that which he had
done, from anguished vitals and aching heart, repenting him with
exceeding repentance of the wrong wherewith he had wronged his
father and repeating,

"Fair youth shall die by stumbling of the tongue: *
     Stumble of foot works not man's life such wrong:
The slip of lip shall oft smite off the head, *
     While slip of foot shall never harm one long."

Now when he had made an end of eating, he asked for the
wherewithal to wash his hands and when the Mameluke had washed
them clean of the remnants of food, he arose and made the
Wuzu-ablution and prayed the prayers of sundown and nightfall,
conjoining them in one; after which he sat down.--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Hundred and Seventy-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Prince Kamar al-Zaman had prayed (conjoining them in one) the
prayers of sundown and nightfall, he sat down on the well and
began reciting the Koran, and he repeated "The Cow," the "House
of Imran," and "Y. S.;" "The Compassionate," "Blessed be the
King," "Unity" and "The two Talismans'' [FN#237]; and he ended
with blessing and supplication and with saying, "I seek refuge
with Allah from Satan the stoned." [FN#238]  Then he lay down upon
his couch which was covered with a mattress of satin from al-
Ma'adin town, the same on both sides and stuffed with the raw
silk of Irak; and under his head was a pillow filled with
ostrich-down And when ready for sleep, he doffed his outer
clothes and drew off his bag-trousers and lay down in a shirt of
delicate stuff smooth as wax; and he donned a head-kerchief of
azure Marazi [FN#239] cloth; and at such time and on this guise
Kamar al-Zaman was like the full-orbed moon, when it riseth on
its fourteenth night. Then, drawing over his head a coverlet of
silk, he fell asleep with the lanthorn burning at his feet and
the wax-candle over his head, and he ceased not sleeping through
the first third of the night, not knowing what lurked for him in
the womb of the Future, and what the Omniscient had decreed for
him. Now, as Fate and Fortune would have it, both tower and
saloon were old and had been many years deserted; and there was
therein a Roman well inhabited by a Jinniyah of the seed of
Iblis [FN#240] the Accursed, by name Maymunah, daughter of Al-
Dimiryat, a renowned King of the Jann.--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the One Hundred and Seventy-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the name of
the Jinniyah in question was Maymunah, daughter of Al-Dimiryat; a
renowned King of the Jann. And as Kamar al-Zaman continued
sleeping till the first third of the night, Maymunah came up out
of the Roman well and made for the firmament, thinking to listen
by stealth to the converse of the angels; but when she reached
the mouth of the well, she saw a light shining in the tower,
contrary to custom; and having dwelt there many years without
seeing the like, she said to herself, "Never have I witnessed
aught like this"; and, marvelling much at the matter, determined
that there must be some cause therefor. So she made for the light
and found the eunuch sleeping within the door; and inside she saw
a couch spread, whereon was a human form with the wax-candle
burning at his head and the lanthorn at his feet, and she
wondered to see the light and stole towards it little by little.
Then she folded her wings and stood by the bed and, drawing back
the coverlid, discovered Kamar al-Zaman's face. She was
motionless for a full hour in admiration and wonderment; for the
lustre of his visage outshone that of the candle; his face beamed
like a pearl with light; his eyelids were languorous like those
of the gazelle; the pupils of his eyes were intensely black and
brilliant [FN#241]; his cheeks were rosy red; his eye-brows were
arched like bows and his breath exhaled a scent of musk, even as
saith of him the poet,

"I kissed him: darker grew those pupils, [FN#242] which *
     Seduce my soul, and cheeks flushed rosier hue;
O heart, if slanderers dare to deem there be *
     His like in chasms, Say 'Bring him hither, you!' "

Now when Maymunah saw him, she pronounced the formula of
praise, [FN#243] and said, "Blessed be Allah, the best of
Creators!"; for she was of the true-believing Jinn; and she stood
awhile gazing on his face, exclaiming and envying the youth his
beauty and loveliness. And she said in herself, "By Allah! I will
do no hurt to him nor let any harm him; nay, from all of evil
will I ransom him, for this fair face deserveth not but that folk
should gaze upon it and for it praise the Lord. Yet how could his
family find it in their hearts to leave him in such desert place
where, if one of our Marids came upon him at this hour, he would
assuredly slay him." Then the Ifritah Maymunah bent over him and
kissed him between the eyes, and presently drew back the sheet
over his face which she covered up; and after this she spread her
wings and soaring into the air, flew upwards. And after rising
high from the circle of the saloon she ceased not winging her way
through air and ascending skywards till she drew near the heaven
of this world, the lowest of the heavens. And behold, she heard
the noisy flapping of wings cleaving the welkin and, directing
herself by the sound, she found when she drew near it that the
noise came from an Ifrit called Dahnash. So she swooped down on
him like a sparrow-hawk and, when he was aware of her and knew
her to be Maymunah, the daughter of the King of the Jinn, he
feared her and his side-muscles quivered; and he implored her
forbearance, saying, I conjure thee by the Most Great and August
Name and by the most noble talisman graven upon the seal-ring of
Solomon, entreat me kindly and harm me not!" When she heard these
words her heart inclined to him and she said, "Verily, thou
conjurest me, O accursed, with a mighty conjuration.
Nevertheless, I will not let thee go, till thou tell me whence
thou comest at this hour." He replied, "O Princess, Know that I
come from the uttermost end of China-land and from among the
Islands, and I will tell thee of a wonderful thing I have seen
this night. If thou kind my words true, let me wend my way and
write me a patent under thy hand and with thy sign manual that I
am thy freedman, so none of the Jinn-hosts, whether of the upper
who fly or of the lower who walk the earth or of those who dive
beneath the waters, do me let or hindrance." Rejoined Maymunah,
"And what is it thou hast seen this night, O liar, O accursed!
Tell me without leasing and think not to escape from my hand with
falses, for I swear to thee by the letters graven upon the bezel
of the seal-ring of Solomon David son (on both of whom be
peace!), except thy speech be true, I will pluck out thy feathers
with mine own hand and strip off thy skin and break thy bones!"
Quoth the Ifrit Dahnash son of Shamhurish [FN#244] the Flyer, "I
accept, O my lady, these conditions."--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Seventy-eight Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Dahnash
spoke thus to Maymunah, "I accept, O my lady, these conditions."
Then he resumed, "Know, O my mistress, that I come to-night from
the Islands of the Inland Sea in the parts of China, which are
the realms of King Ghayur, lord of the Islands and the Seas and
the Seven Palaces. There I saw a daughter of his, than whom Allah
hath made none fairer in her time: I cannot picture her to thee,
for my tongue would fail to describe her with her due of praise;
but I will name to thee a somewhat of her charms by way of
approach. Now her hair is like the nights of disunion and
separation and her face like the days of union and delectation;
and right well hath the poet said when picturing her,

'She dispread the locks from her head one night, *
     Showing four fold nights into one night run
And she turned her visage towards the moon, *
     And two moons showed at moment one.'

She hath a nose like the edge of the burnished blade and cheeks
like purple wine or anemones blood-red: her lips as coral and
carnelian shine and the water of her mouth is sweeter than old
wine; its taste would quench Hell's fiery pain. Her tongue is
moved by wit of high degree and ready repartee: her breast is a
seduction to all that see it (glory be to Him who fashioned it
and finished it!); and joined thereto are two upper arms smooth
and rounded; even as saith of her the poet Al-Walahan, [FN#245]

'She hath wrists which, did her bangles not contain, *
     Would run from out her sleeves in silvern rain.'

She hath breasts like two globes of ivory, from whose brightness
the moons borrow light, and a stomach with little waves as it
were a figured cloth of the finest Egyptian linen made by the
Copts, with creases like folded scrolls, ending in a waist
slender past all power of imagination; based upon back parts like
a hillock of blown sand, that force her to sit when she would
fief stand, and awaken her, when she fain would sleep, even as
saith of her and describeth her the poet,

'She hath those hips conjoined by thread of waist, *
     Hips that o'er me and her too tyrannise
My thoughts they daze whene'er I think of them, *
     And weigh her down whene'er she would uprise.' [FN#246]

And those back parts are upborne by thighs smooth and round and
by a calf like a column of pearl, and all this reposeth upon two
feet, narrow, slender and pointed like spear-blades, [FN#247]  the
handiwork of the Protector and Requiter, I wonder how, of their
littleness, they can sustain what is above them. But I cut short
my praises of her charms fearing lest I be tedious."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Seventy-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Ifrit
Dahnash bin Shamhurish said to the Ifritah Maymunah, "Of a truth
I cut short my praises fearing lest I be tedious." Now when
Maymunah heard the description of that Princess and her beauty
and loveliness, she stood silent in astonishment; whereupon
Dahnash resumed, "The father of this fair maiden is a mighty
King, a fierce knight, immersed night and day in fray and fight;
for whom death hath no fright and the escape of his foe no dread,
for that he is a tyrant masterful and a conqueror irresistible,
lord of troops and armies and continents and islands, and cities
and villages, and his name is King Ghayur, Lord of the Islands
and of the Seas and of the Seven Palaces. Now he loveth his
daughter, the young maiden whom I have described to thee, with
dearest love and, for affection of her, he hath heaped together
the treasures of all the kings and built her therewith seven
palaces, each of a different fashion; the first of crystal, the
second of marble, the third of China steel, the fourth of
precious stones and gems of price, the fifth of porcelain and
many-hued onyxes and ring bezels, the sixth of silver and the
seventh of gold. And he hath filled the seven palaces with all
sorts of sumptuous furniture, rich silken carpets and hangings
and vessels of gold and silver and all manner of gear that kings
require; and hath bidden his daughter to abide in each by turns
for a certain season of the year; and her name is the Princess
Budur. [FN#248]  Now when her beauty became known and her name and
fame were bruited abroad in the neighbouring countries, all the
kings sent to her father to demand her of him in marriage, and he
consulted her on the matter, but she disliked the very word
wedlock with a manner of abhorrence and said, O my father, I have
no mind to marry; no, not at all; for I am a sovereign Lady and a
Queen suzerain ruling over men, and I have no desire for a man
who shall rule over me. And the more suits she refused, the more
her suitors' eagerness increased and all the Royalties of the
Inner Islands of China sent presents and rarities to her father
with letters asking her in marriage. So he pressed her again and
again with advice on the matter of espousals; but she ever
opposed to him refusals, till at last she turned upon him angrily
and cried, 'O my father, if thou name matrimony to me once more,
I will go into my chamber and take a sword and, fixing its hilt
in the ground, will set its point to my waist; then will I press
upon it, till it come forth from my back, and so slay myself.'
Now when the King heard these her words, the light became
darkness in his sight and his heart burned for her as with a
flame of fire, because he feared lest she should kill herself;
and he was filled with perplexity concerning her affair and the
kings her suitors. So he said to her 'If thou be determined not
to marry and there be no help for it abstain from going and
coming in and out.' Then he placed her in a house and shut her up
in a chamber, appointing ten old women as duennas to guard her,
and forbade her to go forth to the Seven Palaces; moreover, he
made it appear that he was incensed against her, and sent letters
to all the kings, giving them to know that she had been stricken
with madness by the Jinns; and it is now a year since she hath
thus been secluded." Then continued the Ifrit Dahnash, addressing
the Ifritah Maymunah, "And I, O my lady go to her every night and
take my fill of feeding my sight on her face and I kiss her
between the eyes: yet, of my love to her, I do her no hurt
neither mount her, for that her youth is fair and her grace
surpassing: every one who seeth her jealouseth himself for her. I
conjure thee, therefore, O my lady, to go back with me and look
on her beauty and loveliness and stature and perfection of
proportion; and after, if thou wilt, chastise me or enslave me;
and win to thy will, for it is shine to bid and to forbid." So
saying, the Ifrit Dahnash bowed his head towards the earth and
drooped his wings downward; but Maymunah laughed at his words and
spat in his face and answered, "What is this girl of whom thou
pratest but a potsherd wherewith to wipe after making
water? [FN#249]  Faugh! Faugh! By Allah, O accursed, I thought
thou hadst some wondrous tale to tell me or some marvellous news
to give me. How would it be if thou were to sight my beloved?
Verily, this night I have seen a young man, whom if thou saw
though but in a dream, thou wouldst be palsied with admiration
and spittle would flow from thy mouth." Asked the Ifrit, "And who
and what is this youth?"; and she answered, "Know, O Dahnash,
that there  hath befallen the young man the like of what thou
tellest me befel thy mistress; for his father pressed him again
and again to marry, but he refused, till at length his sire waxed
wroth at being opposed and imprisoned him in the tower where I
dwell: and I came up to-night and saw him." Said Dahnash, "O my
lady, shew me this youth, that I may see if he be indeed
handsomer than my mistress, the Princess Budur, or not; for I
cannot believe that the like of her liveth in this our age."
Rejoined Maymunah, "Thou liest, O accursed, O most ill-omened of
Marids and vilest of Satans! [FN#250]  Sure am I that the like of
my beloved is not in this world."--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When It was the One Hundred and Eightieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Ifritah
Maymunah spake thus to the Ifrit Dahnash, "Sure am I that the
like of my beloved is not in this world! Art thou mad to fellow
thy beloved with my beloved?" He said, "Allah upon thee, O my
lady, go back with me and look upon my mistress, and after I will
with thee and look upon thy beloved." She answered, "It must
needs be so, O accursed, for thou art a knavish devil; but I will
not go with thee nor shalt thou come with me, save upon condition
of a wager which is this. If the lover thou lovest and of whom
thou boastest so bravely, prove handsomer than mine whom I
mentioned and whom I love and of whom I boast, the bet shall be
shine against me; but if my beloved prove the handsomer the bet
shall be mine against thee." Quoth Dahnash the Ifrit, "O my lady,
I accept this thy wager and am satisfied thereat; so come with me
to the Islands." Quoth Maymunah; "No! for the abode of my beloved
is nearer than the abode of shine: here it is under us; so come
down with me to see my beloved and after we will go look upon thy
mistress." "I hear and I obey," said Dahnash. So they descended
to earth and alighted in the saloon which the tower contained;
then Maymunah stationed Dahnash beside the bed and, putting out
her hand, drew back the silken coverlet from Kamar al-Zaman's
face, when it glittered and glistened and shimmered and shone
like the rising sun. She gazed at him for a moment, then turning
sharply round upon Dahnash said, "Look, O accursed, and be not
the basest of madmen; I am a maid, yet my heart he hath waylaid."
So Dahnash looked at the Prince and long continued gazing
steadfastly on him then, shaking his head, said to Maymunah, "By
Allah, O my lady, thou art excusable; but there is yet another
thing to be considered, and this is, that the estate female
differeth from the male. By Allah's might, this thy beloved is
the likest of all created things to my mistress in beauty and
loveliness and grace and perfection; and it is as though they
were both cast alike in the mould of seemlihead." Now when
Maymunah heard these words, the light became darkness in her
sight and she dealt him with her wing so fierce a buffet on the
head as well-nigh made an end of him. Then quoth she to him, "I
conjure thee, by the light of his glorious countenance, go at
once, O accursed, and bring hither thy mistress whom thou lovest
so fondly and foolishly, and return in haste that we may lay the
twain together and look on them both as they lie asleep side by
side; so shall it appear to us which be the goodlier and more
beautiful of the two. Except thou obey me this very moment, O
accursed, I will dart my sparks at thee with my fire and consume
thee; yea, in pieces I will rend thee and into the deserts cast
thee, that to stay at home and wayfarer an example thou be!"
Quoth Dahnash, "O my lady, I will do thy behests, for I know
forsure that my mistress is the fairer and the sweeter." So
saying the If rit flew away and Maymunah flew with him to guard
him. They were absent awhile and presently returned, bearing the
young lady, who was clad in a shift of fine Venetian silk, with a
double edging of gold and purfled with the most exquisite of
embroidery having these couplets worked upon the ends of the
sleeves,

"Three matters hinder her from visiting us, in fear *
     Of hate-full, slandering envier and his hired spies:
The shining light of brow, the trinkets' tinkling voice, *
     And scent of essences that tell whene'er she tries:
Gi'en that she hide her brow with edge of sleeve, and leave *
     At home her trinketry, how shall her scent
     disguise?'' [FN#251]

And Dahnash and Maymunah stinted not bearing that young lady till
they had carried her into the saloon and had laid her beside the
youth Kamar al-Zaman.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Eighty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Ifrit
Dahnash and the Ifritah Maymunah stinted not bearing Princess
Budur till they descended and laid her on the couch beside Kamar
al- Zaman. Then they uncovered both their faces, and they were
the likest of all folk, each to other, as they were twins or an
only brother and sister; and indeed they were a seduction to the
pious, even as saith of them the poet Al-Mubin,

"O heart! be not thy love confined to one, *
     Lest thou by doting or disdain be undone:
Love all the fair, and thou shalt find with them *
     If this be lost, to thee that shall be won."

And quoth another,

"Mine eyes beheld two lying on the ground; *
     Both had I loved if on these eyne they lay!"

So Dahnash and Maymunah gazed on them awhile, and he said, "By
Allah, O my lady, it is good! My mistress is assuredly the
fairer." She replied, "Not so, my beloved is the fairer; woe to
thee, O Dahnash! Art blind of eye and heart that lean from fat
thou canst not depart? Wilt thou hide the truth? Dost thou not
see his beauty and loveliness and fine stature and symmetry? Out
on thee, hear what I purpose to say in praise of my beloved and,
if thou be a lover true to her thou dost love, do thou the like
for her thou Lovest." Then she kissed Kamar al-Zaman again and
again between the eyes and improvised this ode,

"How is this? Why should the blamer abuse thee in his pride?
What shall console my heart for thee, that art but slender bough?

A Nature Kohl'd [FN#252] eye thou hast that witcheth far and wide;
From pure platonic love [FN#253] of it deliverance none I trow!

Those glances, fell as plundering Turk, to heart such havoc deal
As never havocked scymitar made keenest at the curve.

On me thou layest load of love the heaviest while I feel
So feeble grown that under weight of chemisette I swerve.

My love for thee as wottest well is habit, and my lowe
Is nature; to all others false is all the love I tender:

Now were my heart but like to shine I never would say No;
Only my wasted form is like thy waist so gracious slender:

Out on him who in Beauty's robe for moon like charms hath fame,
And who is claimed by mouth of men as marvel of his tribe!

'Of man what manner may he be' (ask they who flyte and blame)
'For whom thy heart is so distressed?' I only cry 'Describe!'

Oh stone-entempered heart of him! learn of his yielding grace
And bending form to show me grace and yielding to consent.

Oh my Prince Beautiful, thou hast an Overseer in place [FN#254]
Who irketh me, and eke a Groom whose wrong cloth ne'er relent.

Indeed he lieth who hath said that all of loveliness
Was pent in Joseph: in thy charms there's many and many a Joe!

The Genii dread me when I stand and face to face address;
But meeting thee my fluttering heart its shame and terror show.

I take aversion semblance and I turn from thee in fright,
But more aversion I assume, more love from me dost claim;

That hair of jetty black! That brow e'er raying radiant light!
Those eyne wherein white jostles black! [FN#255]  That dearling
     dainty frame!"

When Dahnash heard the poesy which Maymunah spake in praise of
her beloved, he joyed with exceeding joy and marvelled with
excessive wonderment.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say

      When it was the One Hundred and Eighty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Ifrit Dahnash heard the poesy which Maymunah spake in praise of
her beloved, he shook for exceeding joy and said, "Thou hast
celebrated thy beloved in song and thou hast indeed done well in
praise of him whom thou lovest! And there is no help for it but
that I also in my turn do my best to enfame my mistress, and
recite somewhat in her honour." Then the Ifrit went up to the
Lady Budur; and' kissing her between the eyes, looked at Maymunah
and at his beloved Princess and recited the following verses,
albeit he had no skill in poesy,

"Love for my fair they chide in angry way; *
     Unjust for ignorance, yea unjustest they!
Ah lavish favours on the love mad, whom *
     Taste of thy wrath and parting woe shall slay:
In sooth for love I'm wet with railing tears, *
     That rail mine eyelids blood thou mightest say:
No marvel what I bear for love, 'tis marvel *
     That any know my "me" while thou'rt away:
Unlawful were our union did I doubt *
     Thy love, or heart incline to other May."

And eke these words:--

"I feed eyes on their stead by the valley's side, *
     And I'm slain and my slaver [FN#256] aside hath tried:
Grief-wine have I drunken, and down my cheeks *
     Dance tears to the song of the camel-guide:
For union-blessing I strive though sure, *
     In Budur and Su'ad all my bliss shall bide: [FN#257]
Wot I not which of three gave me most to 'plain, *
     So hear them numbered ere thou decide:
Those Sworders her eyne, that Lancer her fig- *
     -ure, or ring-mail'd Locks which her forehead hide.
Quoth she (and I ask of her what so wights *
     Or abide in towns or in desert ride [FN#258] )
To me, 'In thy heart I dwell, look there!' *
     Quoth I, 'Where's my heart ah where? ah where?'"

When Maymunah heard these lines from the Ifrit, she said, "Thou
hast done well, O Dahnash! But say thou which of the two is the
handsomer?" And he answered, "My mistress Budur is handsomer than
thy beloved!" Cried Maymunah, "Thou liest, O accursed. Nay, my
beloved is more beautiful than shine!" But Dahnash persisted,
"Mine is the fairer." And they ceased not to wrangle and
challenge each other's words till Maymunah cried out at Dahnash
and would have laid violent hands on him, but he humbled himself
to her and, softening his speech, said, "Let not the truth be a
grief to thee, and cease we this talk, for all we say is to
testify in favour of our lovers; rather let each of us withdraw
the claim and seek we one who shall judge fairly between us which
of the two be fairer; and by his sentence we will abide." "I
agree to this," answered she and smote the earth with her foot,
whereupon there came out of it an Ifrit blind of an eye,
humpbacked and scurvy-skinned, with eye-orbits slit up and down
his face. [FN#259] On his head were seven horns and four locks of
hair fell to his heels; his hands were pitchfork-like and his
legs mast-like and he had nails as the claws of a lion, and feet
as the hoofs of the wild ass. [FN#260]  When that If rit rose out
of the earth and sighted Maymunah, he kissed the ground before
her and, standing with his hands clasped behind him, said, "What
is thy will, O my mistress, O daughter of my King?" [FN#261] She
replied, "O Kashkash, I would have thee judge between me and this
accursed Dahnash." And she made known to him the matter, from
first to last, whereupon the Ifrit Kashkash looked at the face of
the youth and then at the face of the girl; and saw them lying
asleep, embraced, each with an arm under the other's neck, alike
in beauty and loveliness and equal in grace and goodliness. The
Marid gazed long upon them, marvelling at their seemlihead; and,
after carefully observing the twain, he turned to Maymunah and
Dahnash, and reseated these couplets.

"Go, visit her thou lovest, and regard not
The words detractors utter, envious churls
Can never favour love. Oh! sure the Merciful
Ne'er made a thing more fair to look upon,
Than two fond lovers in each others' arms,
Speaking their passion in a mute embrace.
When heart has turned to heart, the fools would part them
Strike idly on cold steel. So when thou'st found
One purely, wholly shine, accept her true heart,
And live for her alone. Oh! thou that blamest
The love-struck for their love, give o'er thy talk,
How canst thou minister to a mind diseased?" [FN#262]

Then he turned again to Maymunah and Dahnash and said to them,
"By Allah, if you will have the truth, I tell you fairly the
twain be equal in beauty, and loveliness and perfect grace and
goodliness, nor can I make any difference between them on account
of their being man and woman. But I have another thought which is
that we wake each of them in turn, without the knowledge of the
other, and whichever is the more enamoured shall be held inferior
in seemlihead and comeliness." Quoth Maymunah, "Right is this
recking," and quoth Dahnash, "I consent to this." Then Dahnash
changed himself to the form of a flea and bit Kamar al-Zaman,
whereupon he started from sleep in a fright.--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Eighty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Dahnash
changed himself to the form of a flea and bit Kamar al-Zaman who
started from sleep in a fright and rubbed the bitten part, his
neck, and scratched it hard because of the smart. Then turning
sideways, he found lying by him something whose breath was
sweeter than musk and whose skin was softer than cream. Hereat
marvelled he with great marvel and he sat up and looked at what
lay beside him; when he saw it to be a young lady like an union
pearl, or a shining sun, or a dome seen from afar on a well built
wall; for she was five feet tall, with a shape like the letter
Alif [FN#263], bosomed high and rosy checked; even as saith of her
the poet,

"Four things which ne'er conjoin, unless it be *
     To storm my vitals and to shed my blood:
Brow white as day and tresses black as night *
     Cheeks rosy red and lips which smiles o'erflood."

And also quoth another,

"A Moon she rises, Willow wand she waves, *
     Breathes Ambergris, and gazes, a Gazelle:
Meseems that sorrow woes my heart and wins *
     And, when she wendeth hastes therein to dwell!"

And when Kamar al-Zaman saw the Lady Budur, daughter of King
Ghayur, and her beauty and comeliness, she was sleeping clad in a
shift of Venetian silk, without her petticoat-trousers, and wore
on her head a kerchief embroidered with gold and set with stones
of price: her ears were hung with twin earrings which shone like
constellations and round her neck was a collar of union pearls,
of size unique, past the competence of any King. When he saw
this, his reason was confounded and natural heat began to stir in
him; Allah awoke in him the desire of coition and he said to
himself, "Whatso Allah willeth, that shall be, and what He
willeth not shall never be!" So saying, he put out his hand and,
turning her over, loosed the collar of her chemise; then arose
before his sight her bosom, with its breasts like double globes
of ivory; whereat his inclination for her redoubled and he
desired her with exceeding hot desire, He would have awakened her
but she would not awake, for Dahnash had made her sleep heavy; so
he shook her and moved her, saying, "O my beloved, awake and look
on me; I am Kamar al-Zaman." But she awoke not, neither moved her
head; where-upon he considered her case for a long hour and said
to himself, "If I guess aright, this is the damsel to whom my
father would have married me and these three years past I have
refused her; but Inshallah!--God willing--as soon as it is dawn,
I will say to him, 'Marry me to her, that I may enjoy her.'"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Eighty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kamar al-
Zaman said to himself, "By Allah, when I see dawn I will say to
my sire, 'Marry me to her that I may enjoy her'; nor will I let
half the day pass ere I possess her and take my fill of her
beauty and loveliness." Then he bent over Budur to buss her,
whereat the Jinniyah Maymunah trembled and was abashed and
Dahnash, the Ifrit, was like to fly for joy. But, as Kamar al-
Zaman was about to kiss her upon the mouth, he was ashamed before
Allah and turned away his head and averted his face, saying to
his heart, "Have patience." Then he took thought awhile and said,
"I will be patient; haply my father when he was wroth with me and
sent me to this jail, may have brought my young lady and made her
lie by my side to try me with her, and may have charged her not
to be readily awakened when I would arouse her, and may have said
to her, 'Whatever thing Kamar al-Zaman do to thee, make me ware
thereof'; or belike my sire standeth hidden in some stead whence
(being himself unseen) he can see all I do with this young lady;
and to morrow he will scold me and cry, 'How cometh it that thou
sayest, I have no mind to marry; and yet thou didst kiss and
embrace yonder damsel?' So I will withhold myself lest I be
ashamed before my sire; and the right and proper thing to do is
not to touch her at this present, nor even to look upon her,
except to take from her somewhat which shall serve as a token to
me and a memorial of her; that some sign endure between me and
her." Then Kamar al-Zaman raised the young lady's hand and took
from her little finger a seal-ring worth an immense amount of
money, for that its bezel was a precious jewel and around it were
graven these couplets,

"Count not that I your promises forgot, *
     Despite the length of your delinquencies
Be generous, O my lord, to me inclining; *
     Haply your mouth and cheeks these lips may kiss:
By Allah, ne'er will I relinquish you *
     Albe you will transgress love's boundaries."

Then Kamar al-Zaman took the seal-ring from the little finger of
Queen Budur and set it on his own; then, turning his back to her,
went to sleep. [FN#264]  When Maymunah the Jinniyah saw this, she
was glad and said to Dahnash and Kashkash, "Saw ye how my beloved
Kamar al-Zaman bore himself chastely towards this young lady?
Verily, this was of the perfection of his good gifts; for observe
you twain how he looked on her and noted her beauty and
loveliness, and yet embraced her not neither kissed her nor put
his hand to her, but turned his back and slept." Answered they,
"Even so!" Thereupon Maymunah changed herself into a flea and
entering into the raiment of Budur, the loved of Dahnash, crept
up her calf and came upon her thigh and, reaching a place some
four carats [FN#265] below her navel, there bit her. Thereupon she
opened her eyes and sitting up in bed, saw a youth lying beside
her and breathing heavily in his sleep, the loveliest of Almighty
Allah's creatures, with eyes that put to shame the fairest Houris
of Heaven; and a mouth like Solomon's seal, whose water was
sweeter to the taste and more efficacious than a theriack, and
lips the colour of coral-stone, and cheeks like the blood red
anemone, even as saith one, describing him in these couplets,

"My mind's withdrawn from Zaynab and Nawar [FN#266] *
     By rosy cheeks that growth of myrtle bear;
I love a fawn, a tunic-vested boy, *
     And leave the love of bracelet-wearing Fair:
My mate in hall and closet is unlike *
     Her that I play with, as at home we pair.
Oh thou, who blam'st my flight from Hind and Zaynab, *
     The cause is clear as dawn uplighting air!
Would'st have me fare [FN#267] a slave, the thrall of thrall, *
     Cribbed, pent, confined behind the bar and wall?"

Now when Princess Budur saw him, she was seized by a transport of
passion and yearning and love-longing,--And Shahrazad per ceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Eighty-fifth Night,

 She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Princess Budur saw Kamar al-Zaman she was forthwith seized with a
transport of passion and yearning and love longing, and she said
to herself, "Alas, my shame! This is a strange youth and I know
him not. How cometh he to be lying by my side on one bed?" Then
she looked at him a second time and, noting his beauty and
loveliness, said, "By Allah, he is indeed a comely youth and my
heart [FN#268] is well-nigh torn in sunder with longing for him!
But alas, how am I shamed by him! By the Almighty, had I known it
was this youth who sought me in marriage of my father, I had not
rejected him, but had wived with him and enjoyed his loveliness!"
Then she gazed in his face and said, "O my lord and light of mine
eyes, awake from sleep and take thy pleasure in my beauty and
grace." And she moved him with her hand; but Maymunah the
Jinniyah let down sleep upon him as it were a curtain, and
pressed heavily on his head with her wings so that Kamar al-Zaman
awoke not. Then Princess Budur shook him with her hands and said,
"My life on thee, hearken to me; awake and up from thy sleep and
look on the narcissus and the tender down thereon, and enjoy the
sight of naked waist and navel; and touzle me and tumble me from
this moment till break of day! Allah upon thee, O my lord, sit up
and prop thee against the pillow and slumber not!" Still Kamar
al-Zaman made her no reply but breathed hard in his sleep.
Continued she, "Alas! Alas! thou art insolent in thy beauty and
comeliness and grace and loving looks! But if thou art handsome,
so am I handsome; what then is this thou dost? Have they taught
thee to flout me or hath my father, the wretched old
fellow, [FN#269] made thee swear not to speak to me to-night?" But
Kamar al-Zaman opened not his mouth neither awoke, whereat her
passion for him redoubled and Allah inflamed her heart with love
of him. She stole one glance of eyes that cost her a thousand
sighs: her heart fluttered, and her vitals throbbed and her hands
and feet quivered; and she said to Kamar al-Zaman "Talk to me, O
my lord! Speak to me, O my friend! Answer me, O my beloved, and
tell me thy name, for indeed thou hast ravished my wit!" And
during all this time he abode drowned in sleep and answered her
not a word, and Princess Budur sighed and said, "Alas! Alas! why
art thou so proud and self satisfied?" Then she shook him and
turning his hand over, saw her seal-ring on his little finger,
whereat she cried a loud cry, and followed it with a sigh of
passion and said, "Alack! Alack! By Allah, thou art my beloved
and thou lovest me! Yet thou seemest to turn thee away from me
out of coquetry, for all, O my darling, thou camest to me, whilst
I was asleep and knew not what thou didst with me, and tookest my
seal-ring; and yet I will not pull it off thy finger." So saying,
she opened the bosom of his shirt and bent over him and kissed
him and put forth her hand to him, seeking somewhat that she
might take as a token, but found nothing. Then she thrust her
hand into his breast and, because of the smoothness of his body,
it slipped down to his waist and thence to his navel and thence
to his yard, whereupon her heart ached and her vitals quivered
and lust was sore upon her, for that the desire of women is
fiercer than the desire of men, [FN#270] and she was ashamed of
her own shamelessness. Then she plucked his seal-ring from his
finger, and put it on her own instead of the ring he had taken,
and bussed his inner lips and hands, nor did she leave any part
of him unkissed; after which she took him to her breast and
embraced him and, laying one of her hands under his neck and the
other under his arm-pit, nestled close to him and fell asleep by
his side.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

      When it was the One hundred and Eighty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Princess Budur fell asleep by the side of Kamar al-Zaman, after
doing that which she did, quoth Maymunah to Dahnash, Night thou,
O accursed, how proudly and coquettishly my beloved bore himself,
and how hotly and passionately thy mistress showed herself to my
dearling? There can be no doubt that my beloved is handsomer than
shine; nevertheless I pardon thee." Then she wrote him a document
of manumission and turned to Kashkash and said, "Go, help Dahnash
to take up his mistress and aid him to carry her back to her own
place, for the night waneth apace and there is but little left of
it." "I hear and I obey;" answered Kashkash. So the two Ifrits
went forward to Princess Budur and upraising her flew away with
her; then, bearing her back to her own place, they laid her on
her bed, whilst Maymunah abode alone with Kamar al-Zaman, gazing
upon him as he slept, till the night was all but spent, when she
went her way. As soon as morning morrowed, the Prince awoke from
sleep and turned right and left, but found not the maiden by him
and said in his mind, "What is this business? It is as if my
father would incline me to marriage with the damsel who was with
me and have now taken her away by stealth, to the intent that my
desire for wedlock may redouble." Then he called out to the
eunuch who slept at the door, saying, "Woe to thee, O damned one,
arise at once!" So the eunuch rose, bemused with sleep, and
brought him basin and ewer, whereupon Kamar al-Zaman entered the
water closet and did his need; [FN#271] then, coming out made the
Wuzu-ablution and prayed the dawn-prayer, after which he sat
telling on his beads the ninety-and-nine names of Almighty Allah.
Then he looked up and, seeing the eunuch standing in service upon
him, said, "Out on thee, O Sawab! Who was it came hither and took
away the young lady from my side and I still sleeping?" Asked the
eunuch, 'O my lord, what manner of young lady?" "The young lady
who lay with me last night," replied Kamar al-Zaman. The eunuch
was startled at his words and said to him, "By Allah, there hath
been with thee neither young lady nor other! How should young
lady have come in to thee, when I was sleeping in the doorway and
the door was locked? By Allah, O my lord, neither male nor female
hath come in to thee!" Exclaimed the Prince, "Thou liest, O
pestilent slave!: is it of thy competence also to hoodwink me and
refuse to tell me what is become of the young lady who lay with
me last night and decline to inform me who took her away?"
Replied the eunuch (and he was affrighted at him), "By Allah, O
my lord, I have seen neither young lady nor young lord!" His
words only angered Kamar al-Zaman the more and he said to him, "O
accursed one, my father hath indeed taught thee deceit! Come
hither." So the eunuch came up to him, and the Prince took him by
the collar and dashed him to the ground; whereupon he let fly a
loud fart [FN#272]  and Kamar al-Zaman, kneeling upon him, kicked
him and throttled him till he fainted away. Then he dragged him
forth and tied him to the well-rope, and let him down like a
bucket into the well and plunged him into the water, then drew
him up and lowered him down again. Now it was hard winter
weather, and Kamar al-Zaman ceased not to plunge the eunuch into
the water and pull him up again and douse him and haul him whilst
he screamed and called for help; and the Prince kept on saying
"By Allah, O damned one, I will not draw thee up out of this well
till thou tell me and fully acquaint me with the story of the
young lady and who it was took her away, whilst I slept."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

         When it was the One and Eighty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kamar al-
Zaman said to the eunuch, "By Allah! I will not draw thee up out
of this well until thou tell me the story of the young lady and
who it was took her away whilst I slept." Answered the eunuch,
after he had seen death staring him in the face; "O my lord, let
me go and I will relate to thee the truth and the whole tale." So
Kamar al-Zaman pulled him up out of the well, all but dead for
suffering, what with cold and the pain of dipping and dousing,
drubbing and dread of drowning. He shook like cane in hurricane,
his teeth were clenched as by cramp and his clothes were drenched
and his body befouled and torn by the rough sides of the well:
briefly he was in a sad pickle. Now when Kamar al-Zaman saw him
in this sorry plight, he was concerned for him; but, as soon as
the eunuch found himself on the floor, he said to him, "O my
lord, let me go and doff my clothes and wring them out and spread
them in the sun to dry, and don others; after which I will return
to thee forthwith and tell thee the truth of the matter."
Answered the Prince, "O rascal slave! hadst thou not seen death
face to face, never hadst thou confessed to fact nor told me a
word; but go now and do thy will, and then come back to me at
once and tell me the truth." Thereupon the eunuch went out,
hardly crediting his escape, and ceased not running, stumbling
and rising in his haste, till he came in to King Shahriman, whom
he found sitting at talk with his Wazir of Kamar al-Zaman's case.
The King was saying to the Minister, "I slept not last night, for
anxiety concerning my son, Kamar al-Zaman and indeed I fear lest
some harm befal him in that old tower. What good was there in
imprisoning him?" Answered the Wazir, "Have no care for him. By
Allah, no harm will befal him! None at all! Leave him in prison
for a month till his temper yield and his spirit be broken and he
return to his senses." As the two spoke behold, up rushed the
eunuch, in the aforesaid plight, making to the King who was
troubled at sight of him; and he cried "O our lord the Sultan!
Verily, thy son's wits are fled and he hath gone mad, he hath
dealt with me thus and thus, so that I am become as thou seest
me, and he kept saying, 'A young lady lay with me this night and
stole away secretly whilst I slept. Where is she?' And he
insisteth on my letting him know where she is and on my telling
him who took her away. But I have seen neither girl nor boy: the
door was locked all through the night, for I slept before it with
the key under my head, and I opened to him in the morning with my
own hand. When King Shahriman heard this, he cried out, saying,
"Alas, my son!;" and he was enraged with sore rage against the
Wazir, who had been the cause of all this case and said to him,
"Go up, bring me news of my son and see what hath befallen his
mind." So the Wazir rose and, stumbling over his long skirts, in
his fear of the King's wrath, hastened with the slave to the
tower. Now the sun had risen and when the Minister came in to
Kamar al-Zaman, he found him sitting on the couch reciting the
Koran; so he saluted him and seated himself by his side, and said
to him, "O my lord, this wretched eunuch brought us tidings which
troubled and alarmed us and which incensed the King." Asked Kamar
al-Zaman, "And what hath he told you of me to trouble my father?
In good sooth he hath troubled none but me." Answered the Wazir,
"He came to us in fulsome state and told us of thee a thing which
Heaven forfend; and the slave added a lie which it befitteth not
to repeat, Allah preserve thy youth and sound sense and tongue of
eloquence, and forbid to come from thee aught of offense!" Quoth
the Prince, "O Wazir, and what thing did this pestilent slave say
of me?" The Minister replied, "He told us that thy wits had taken
leave of thee and thou wouldst have it that a young lady lay with
thee last night, and thou west instant with him to tell thee
whither she went and thou diddest torture him to that end." But
when Kamar al-Zaman heard these words, he was enraged with sore
rage and he said to the Wazir, "'Tis manifest to me in very deed
that you people taught the eunuch to do as he did."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her per
misted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Eighty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Kamar
al-Zaman heard the words of the Wazir he was enraged with sore
rage and said to him, "'Tis manifest to me in very deed that you
people taught the eunuch to do as he did and forbade him to tell
me what became of the young lady who lay with me last night. But
thou, O Wazir, art cleverer than the eunuch, so do thou tell me
without stay or delay, whither went the young lady who slept on
my bosom last night; for it was you who sent her and bade her
steep in my embrace and we lay together till dawn; but, when I
awoke, I found her not. So where is she now?" Said the Wazir, "O
my lord Kamar al-Zaman, Allah's name encompass thee about! By the
Almighty, we sent none to thee last night, but thou layest alone,
with the door locked on thee and the eunuch sleeping behind it,
nor did there come to thee young lady or any other. Regain thy
reason, O my lord, and stablish thy senses and occupy not thy
mind with vanities." Rejoined Kamar al-Zaman who was incensed at
his words, "O Wazir, the young lady in question is my beloved,
the fair one with the black eyes and rosy cheeks, whom I held in
my arms all last night." So the Minister wondered at his words
and asked him, "Didst thou see this damsel last night with shine
own eyes on wake or in sleep?" Answered Kamar al-Zaman, "O ill-
omened old man, dost thou fancy I saw her with my ears? Indeed, I
saw her with my very eyes and awake, and I touched her with my
hand, and I watched by her full half the night, feeding my vision
on her beauty and loveliness and grace and tempting looks. But
you had schooled her and charged her to speak no word to me; so
she feigned sleep and I lay by her side till dawn, when I awoke
and found her gone." Rejoined the Wazir, "O my lord Kamar al-
Zaman, haply thou sawest this in thy sleep; it must have been a
delusion of dreams or a deception caused by eating various kinds
of food, or a suggestion of the accursed devils." Cried the
Prince, "O pestilent old man! wilt thou too make a mock of me and
tell me this was haply a delusion of dreams, when that eunuch
confessed to the young lady, saying, 'At once I will return to
thee and tell thee all about her?'" With these words, he sprang
up and rushed at the Wazir and gripped hold of his beard (which
was long [FN#273]) and, after gripping it, he twisted his hand in
it and haling him off the couch, threw him on the floor. It
seemed to the Minister as though his soul departed his body for
the violent plucking at his beard; and Kamar al-Zaman ceased not
kicking the Wazir and basting his breast and ribs and cuffing him
with open hand on the nape of his neck till he had well-nigh
beaten him to death. Then said the old man in his mind, "Just as
the eunuch-slave saved his life from this lunatic youth by
telling him a lie, thus it is even fitter that I do likewise;
else he will destroy me. So now for my lie to save myself, he
being mad beyond a doubt." Then he turned to Kamar al-Zaman and
said, "O my lord, pardon me; for indeed thy father charged me to
conceal from thee this affair of the young lady; but now I am
weak and weary and wounded with funding; for I am an old man and
lack strength and bottom to endure blows. Have, therefore, a
little patience with me and I will tell thee all and acquaint
thee with the story of the young woman." When the Prince heard
this, he left off drubbing him and said, "Wherefore couldst thou
not tell me the tale until after shame and blows? Rise now,
unlucky old man that thou art, and tell me her story." Quoth the
Wazir, "Say, dost thou ask of the young lady with the fair face
and perfect form?" Quoth Kamar al-Zaman, "Even so! Tell me, O
Wazir, who it was that led her to me and laid her by my side, and
who was it that took her away from me by night; and let me know
forthright whither she is gone, that I myself may go to her at
once. If my father did this deed to me that he might try me by
means of that beautiful girl, with a view to our marriage, I
consent to wed her and free myself of this trouble; for he did
all these dealings with me only because I refused wedlock. But
now I consent and I say again, I consent to matrimony: so tell
this to my father, O Wazir, and advise him to marry me to that
young lady; for I will have none other and my heart loveth none
save her alone. Now rise up at once and haste thee to my father
and counsel him to hurry on our wedding and bring me his answer
within this very hour." Rejoined the Wazir, "'Tis well!" and went
forth from him, hardly believing himself out of his hands. Then
he set off from the tower, walking and tripping up as he went,
for excess of fright and agitation, and he ceased not hurrying
till he came in to King Shahriman.--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Eighty-nineth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Wazir,
fared forth from the tower, and ceased not running till he came
in to King Shahriman, who said to him as he sighted him, "O thou
Wazir, what man hath brought thee to grief and whose mischief
hath treated thee in way unlief; how happeneth it that I see thee
dumb foundered and coming to me thus astounded?" Replied the
Wazir, "O King! I bring thee good news." "And what is it?" quoth
Shahriman, and quoth the Wazir, "Know that thy son Kamar al-
Zaman's wits are clean gone and that he hath become stark mad."
Now when the King heard these words of the Minister, light became
darkness in his sight and he said, "O Wazir, make clear to me the
nature of his madness." Answered the Wazir, "O my lord, I hear
and I obey." Then he told him that such and such had passed and
acquainted him with all that his son had done; whereupon the King
said to him, "Hear, O Wazir, the good tidings which I give thee
in return for this thy fair news of my son's insanity; and it
shall be the cutting off of thy head and the forfeiture of my
favour, O most ill-omened of Wazirs and foulest of Emirs! for I
feel that thou hast caused my son's disorder by the wicked advice
and the sinister counsel thou hast given me first and last. By
Allah, if aught of mischief or madness have befallen my son I
will most assuredly nail thee upon the palace dome and make thee
drain the bitterest draught of death!'' Then he sprang up and,
taking the Wazir, with him, fared straight for the tower and
entered it. And when Kamar al-Zaman saw the two, he rose to his
father in haste from the couch whereon he sat and kissing his
hands drew back and hung down his head and stood before him with
his arms behind him, and thus remained for a full hour. Then he
raised his head towards his sire; the tears gushed from his eyes
and streamed down his cheeks and he began repeating,

"Forgive the sin 'neath which my limbs are trembling,
For the slave seeks for mercy from his master;
I've done a fault, which calls for free confession,
Where shall it call for mercy, and forgiveness?'' [FN#274]

When the King heard this, he arose and embraced his son, and
kissing him between the eyes, made him sit by his side on the
couch; then he turned to the Wazir, and, looking on him with eyes
of wrath, said, "O dog of Wazirs, how didst thou say of my son
such and such things and make my heart quake for him?" Then he
turned to the Prince and said, "O my son, what is to-day called?"
He answered, "O my father, this day is the Sabbath, and to morrow
is First day: then come Second day, Third, Fourth, Fifth day and
lastly Friday." [FN#275] Exclaimed the King, "O my son, O Kamar
al-Zaman, praised be Allah for the preservation of thy reason!
What is the present month called in our Arabic?" "Zu'l Ka'adah,"
answered Kamar al-Zaman, "and it is followed by Zu'l hijjah; then
cometh Muharram, then Safar, then Rabi'a the First and Rabi'a the
Second, the two Jamadas, Rajab, Sha'aban, Ramazan and Shawwal."
At this the King rejoiced exceedingly and spat in the Wazir's
face, saying, "O wicked old man, how canst thou say that my son
is mad? And now none is mad but thou." Hereupon the Minister
shook his head and would have spoken, but bethought himself to
wait awhile and see what might next befal. Then the King said to
his child, "O my son, what words be these thou saddest to the
eunuch and the Wazir, declaring, 'I was sleeping with a fair
damsel this night?' [FN#276] What damsel is this of whom thou
speakest?" Then Kamar al-Zaman laughed at his father's words and
replied, "O my father, know that I can bear no more jesting; so
add me not another mock or even a single word on the matter, for
my temper hath waxed short by that you have done with me. And
know, O my father, with assured knowledge, that I consent to
marry, but on condition that thou give me to wife her who lay by
my side this night; for I am certain it was thou sentest her to
me and madest me in love with her and then despatchedst a message
to her before the dawn and tookest her away from beside me."
Rejoined the King, "The name of Allah encompass thee about, O my
son, and be thy wit preserved from witlessness!"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the One Hundred and Ninetieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth King
Shahriman to his son Kamar al-Zaman, "The name of Allah encompass
thee about, O my son, and be thy wit preserved from witlessness!
What thing be this young lady whom thou fanciest I sent to thee
last night and then again that I sent to withdraw her from thee
before dawn? By the Lord, O my son, I know nothing of this
affair, and Allah upon thee, tell me if it be a delusion of
dreaming or a deception caused by indisposition. For verily thou
layest down to sleep last night with thy mind occupied anent
marriage and troubled with the talk of it (Allah damn marriage
and the hour when I spake of it and curse him who counselled
it!); and without doubt or diffidence I can say that being moved
in mind by the mention of wedlock thou dreamedst that a handsome
young lady embraced thee and didst fancy thou sawest her when
awake. But all this, O my son, is but an imbroglio of dreams."
Replied Kamar al-Zaman, "Leave this talk and swear to me by
Allah, the All creator, the Omniscient; the Humbler of the tyrant
Caesars and the Destroyer of the Chosroes, that thou knowest
naught of the young lady nor of her woning-place." Quoth the
King, "By the Might of Allah Almighty, the God of Moses and
Abraham, I know naught of all this and never even heard of it; it
is assuredly a delusion of dreams thou hast seen in sleep.' Then
the Prince replied to his sire, "I will give thee a self evident
proof that it happened to me when on wake."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Ninety-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kamar al
Zamar said to his sire, "I will give thee a self-evident proof
that this happened to me when on wake. Now let me ask thee, did
it ever befal any man to dream that he was battling a sore battle
and after to awake from sleep and find in his hand a sword-blade
besmeared with blood? Answered the King, "No, by Allah, O my son,
this hath never been." Rejoined Kamar al-Zaman, "I will tell thee
what happened to me and it was this. Meseemed I awoke from sleep
in the middle of the past night and found a girl lying by my
side, whose form was like mine and whose favour was as mine. I
embraced her and turned her about with my hand and took her seal-
ring, which I put on my finger, and she pulled off my ring and
put it on hers. Then I went to sleep by her side, but refrained
from her for shame of thee, deeming that thou hadst sent her to
me, intending to tempt me with her and incline me to marriage,
and suspecting thee to be hidden somewhere whence thou couldst
see what I did with her. And I was ashamed even to kiss her on
the mouth for thy account, thinking over this temptation to
wedlock; and, when I awoke at point of day, I found no trace of
her, nor could I come at any news of her, and there befel me what
thou knowest of with the eunuch and with the Wazir. How then can
this case have been a dream and a delusion, when the ring is a
reality? Save for her ring on my finger I should indeed have
deemed it a dream; but here is the ring on my little finger: look
at it, O King, and see what is its worth." So saying he handed
the ring to his father, who examined it and turned it over, then
looked to his son and said, "Verily, there is in this ring some
mighty mystery and some strange secret. What befel thee last
night with the girl is indeed a hard nut to crack, and I know not
how intruded upon us this intruder. None is the cause of all this
posher save the Wazir; but, Allah upon thee, O my son, take
patience, so haply the Lord may turn to gladness this thy grief
and to thy sadness bring complete relief: as quoth one of the
poets,

'Haply shall Fortune draw her rein, and bring *
     Fair chance, for she is changeful, jealous, vain:
Still I may woo my want and wishes win, *
     And see on heels of care unfair, the fain.'

And now, O my son, I am certified at this hour that thou art not
mad; but thy case is a strange one which none can clear up for
thee save the Almighty." Cried the Prince, "By Allah, O my
father, deal kindly with me and seek out this young lady and
hasten her coming to me; else I shall die of woe and of my death
shall no one know." Then he betrayed the ardour of his passion;
and turned towards his father and repeated these two couplets,

"If your promise of personal call prove untrue, *
     Deign in vision to grant me an interview:
Quoth they, 'How can phantom [FN#277] appear to the sight *
     Of a youth, whose sight is fordone, perdue?'"

Then, after ending his poetry, Kamar al-Zaman again turned to his
father, with submission and despondency, and shedding tears in
flood, began repeating these lines.--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Ninety-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Kamar
al-Zaman had repeated to his father these verses, he wept and
complained and groaned from a wounded heart; and added these
lines,

"Beware that eye glance which hath magic might; *
     Wherever turn those orbs it bars our flight:
Nor be deceived by low sweet voice, that breeds *
     A fever festering in the heart and sprite:
So soft that silky skin, were rose to touch it *
     She'd cry and tear-drops rain for pain and fright:
Did Zephyr e'en in sleep pass o'er her land, *
     Scented he'd choose to dwell in scented site:
Her necklets vie with tinkling of her belt; *
     Her wrists strike either wristlet dumb with spite:
When would her bangles buss those rings in ear, *
     Upon the lover's eyne high mysteries 'light:
I'm blamed for love of her, nor pardon claim; *
     Eyes are not profiting which lack foresight:
Heaven strip thee, blamer mine! unjust art thou; *
     Before this fawn must every eye low bow." [FN#278]

After which he said, "By Allah, O my father, I cannot endure to
be parted from her even for an hour." The King smote hand upon
hand and exclaimed, "There is no Majesty and there is no Might
save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! No cunning contrivance
can profit us in this affair." Then he took his son by the hand
and carried him to the palace, where Kamar al-Zaman lay down on
the bed of languor and the King sat at his head, weeping and
mourning over him and leaving him not, night or day, till at last
the Wazir came in to him and said, "O King of the age and the
time, how long wilt thou remain shut up with thy son and hide
thyself from thy troops. Haply, the order of thy realm may be
deranged, by reason of shine absence from thy Grandees and
Officers of State. It behoveth the man of understanding, if he
have various wounds in his body, to apply him first to medicine
the most dangerous; so it is my counsel to thee that thou remove
thy son from this place to the pavilion which is in the palace
overlooking the sea; and shut thyself up with him there, setting
apart in every week two days, Thursday and Monday, for state
receptions and progresses and reviews. On these days let shine
Emirs and Wazirs and Chamberlains and Viceroys and high Officials
and Grandees of the realm and the rest of the levies and the
lieges have access to thee and submit their affairs to thee; and
do thou their needs and judge among them and give and take with
them and bid and forbid. And the rest of the week thou shalt pass
with thy son, Kamar al-Zaman, and cease not thus doing till Allah
shall vouchsafe relief to you twain. Think not, O King, that thou
art safe from the shifts of Time and the strokes of Change which
come like a traveller in the night; for the wise man is ever on
his guard and how well saith the poet,

'Thou deemedst well of Time when days went well, *
     And fearedst not what ills might bring thee Fate:
The Nights so fair and restful cozened thee, *
     For peaceful Nights bring woes of heavy weight.
Oh children of mankind whom Time befriends, *
     Beware of Time's deceits or soon or late!''' [FN#279]

When the Sultan heard his Wazir's words he saw that they were
right and deemed his counsel wise, and it had effect upon him for
he feared lest the order of the state be deranged; so he rose at
once and bade transport his son from his sick room to the
pavilion in the palace overlooking the sea. Now this palace was
girt round by the waters and was approached by a causeway twenty
cubits wide. It had windows on all sides commanding an ocean-
view; its floor was paved with parti-coloured marbles and its
ceiling was painted in the richest pigments and figured with gold
and lapis-lazuli. They furnished it for Kamar al-Zaman with
splendid upholstery, embroidered rugs and carpets of the richest
silk; and they clothed the walls with choice brocades and hung
curtains bespangled with gems of price. In the midst they set him
a couch of juniper [FN#280]-wood inlaid with pearls and jewels,
and Kamar al-Zaman sat down thereon, but the excess of his
concern and passion for the young lady had wasted his charms and
emaciated his body; he could neither eat nor drink nor sleep; and
he was like a man who had been sick twenty years of sore
sickness. His father seated himself at his head, grieving for him
with the deepest grief, and every Monday and Thursday he gave his
Wazirs and Emirs and Chamberlains and Viceroys and Lords of the
realm and levies and the rest of his lieges leave to come up to
him in that pavilion. So they entered and did their several
service and duties and abode with him till the end of the day,
when they went their ways and the King returned to his son in the
pavilion whom he left not night nor day; and he ceased not doing
on this wise for many days and nights. Such was the case with
Kamar al-Zaman, son of King Shahriman; but as regards Princess
Budur, daughter of King Ghayur, Lord of the Isles and the Seven
Palaces, when the two Jinns bore her up and laid her on her bed,
she slept till daybreak, when she awoke and sitting upright
looked right and left, but saw not the youth who had lain in her
bosom. At this her vitals fluttered, her reason fled and she
shrieked a loud shriek which awoke all her slave girls and nurses
and duennas. They flocked in to her; and the chief of them came
forward and asked, "What aileth thee, O my lady?" Answered the
Princess, "O wretched old woman, where is my beloved, the
handsome youth who lay last night in my bosom? Tell me whither he
is gone." Now when the duenna heard this, the light starkened in
her sight and she feared from her mischief with sore affright,
and said to her, "O my Lady Budur, what unseemly words are
these?" Cried the Princess, "Woe to thee pestilent crone that
thou art! I ask thee again where is my beloved, the goodly youth
with the shining face and the slender form, the jetty eyes and
the joined eyebrows, who lay with me last night from supper-tide
until near daybreak?" She rejoined "By Allah, O my lady, I have
seen no young man nor any other. I conjure thee, carry not this
unseemly jest too far lest we all lose our lives; for perhaps the
joke may come to thy father's ears and who shall then deliver us
from his hand?"--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Ninety-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the duenna
bespake the Lady Budur in these words, "Allah upon thee, O my
lady! carry not this unseemly jest too far; for perhaps it may
come to thy father's ears, and who shall then deliver us from his
hand?" The Princess rejoined, "In very sooth a youth lay with me
last night, one of the fairest-faced of men." Exclaimed the
duenna, "Heaven preserve thy reason! indeed no one lay with thee
last night." Thereupon the Princess looked at her hand and,
finding Kamar al-Zaman's seal-ring on her finger in stead of her
own, said to her, "Woe to thee, thou accursed! thou traitress!
wilt thou lie to me and tell me that none lay with me last night
and swear to me a falsehood in the name of the Lord?" Replied the
duenna, "By Allah, I do not lie to thee nor have I sworn
falsely." Then the Princess was incensed by her words and,
drawing a sword she had by her, she smote the old woman with it
and slew her; [FN#281] whereupon the eunuch and the waiting-women
and the concubines cried out at her, and ran to her father and,
without stay or delay, acquainted him with her case. So the King
went to her, and asked her, "O my daughter, what aileth thee?";
and she answered, "O my father, where is the youth who lay with
me last night?" Then her reason fled from her head and she cast
her eyes right and left and rent her raiment even to the skirt.
When her sire saw this, he bade the women lay hands on her; so
they seized her and manacled her, then putting a chain of iron
about her neck, made her fast to one of the palace-windows and
there left her. [FN#282] Thus far concerning Princess Budur; but
as regards her father, King Ghayur, the world was straitened upon
him when he saw what had befallen his daughter, for that he loved
her and her case was not a little grievous to him. So he summoned
on it the doctors and astrologers and men skilled in talisman-
writing and said to them, "Whoso healeth my daughter of what ill
she hath, I will marry him to her and give him half of my
kingdom; but whoso cometh to her and cureth her not, I will
strike off his head and hang it over her palace-gate."
Accordingly, all who went in to her, but failed to heal her, he
beheaded and hung their heads over the palace-gates, till he had
beheaded on her account forty doctors and crucified forty
astrologers; wherefor the general held aloof from her, all the
physicians having failed to medicine her malady; and her case was
a puzzle to the men of science and the adepts in cabalistic
characters. And as her longing and passion redoubled and love and
distraction were sore upon her, she poured forth tears and
repeated these couplets,

"My fondness, O my moon, for thee my foeman is, *
     And to thy comradeship the nights my thought compel:
In gloom I bide with fire that flames below my ribs, *
     Whose lowe I make comparison with heat of Hell:
I'm plagued with sorest stress of pine and ecstasy; *
     Nor clearest noon tide can that horrid pain dispel."

Then she sighed and repeated these also,

"Salams fro' me to friends in every stead; *
     Indeed to all dear friends do I incline:
Salams, but not salams that bid adieu; *
     Salams that growth of good for you design:
I love you dear, indeed, nor less your land, *
     But bide I far from every need of mine!"

And when the Lady Budur ceased repeating her poetry, she wept
till her eyes waxed sore and her cheeks changed form and hue, and
in this condition she continued three years. Now she had a
foster-brother, by name Marzawan, [FN#283] who was travelling in
far lands and absent from her the whole of this time. He loved
her with an exceeding love, passing the love of brothers; so when
he came back he went in to his mother and asked for his sister,
the Princess Budur. She answered him, "O my son, thy sister hath
been smitten with madness and hath passed these three years with
a chain of iron about her neck; and all the physicians and men of
science have failed of healing her." When Marzawan heard these
words he said, "I must needs go in to her; peradventure I may
discover what she hath, and be able to medicine her;" and his
mother replied, "Needs must thou visit her, but wait till to
morrow, that I may contrive some thing to suit thy case." Then
she went a-foot to the palace of the Lady Budur and, accosting
the eunuch in charge of the gates, made him a present and said to
him, "I have a daughter, who was brought up with thy mistress and
since then I married her; and, when that befel the Princess which
befel her, she became troubled and sore concerned, and I desire
of thy favour that my daughter may go in to her for an hour and
look on her; and then return whence she came, so shall none know
of it." Quoth the eunuch, "This may not be except by night, after
the King hath visited his child and gone away; then come thou and
thy daughter." So she kissed the eunuch's hand and, returning
home, waited till the morrow at nightfall; and when it was time
she arose and sought her son Marzawan and attired him in woman's
apparel; then, taking his hand in hers, led him towards the
palace, and ceased not walking with him till she came upon the
eunuch after the Sultan had ended his visit to the Princess. Now
when the eunuch saw her, he rose to her, and said, "Enter, but do
not prolong thy stay!" So they went in and when Marzawan beheld
the Lady Budur in the aforesaid plight, he saluted her, after his
mother had doffed his woman's garb: then he took out of their
satchel books he had brought with him; and, lighting a wax-
candle, he began to recite certain conjurations Thereupon the
Princess looked at him and recognising him, said, "O my brother,
thou hast been absent on thy travels' and thy news have been cut
off from us." He replied, "True! but Allah hath brought me back
safe and sound, I am now minded to set out again nor hath aught
delayed me but the news I hear of thee; wherefore my heart burned
for thee and I came to thee, so haply I may free thee of thy
malady." She rejoined, O my brother, thinkest thou it is madness
aileth me?" "Yes." answered he, and she said, "Not so, by Allah!
'tis even as saith the poet,

'Quoth they 'Thou rav'st on him thou lov'st': quoth I, *
     'The sweets of love are only for th' insane!'
Love never maketh Time his friend befriend; *
     Only the Jinn-struck wight such boon can gain:
Well! yes, I'm mad: bring him who madded me *
     And, if he cure m: madness, blame restrain!'"

Then she let Marzawan know that she was love-daft and he said
"Tell me concerning thy tale and what befel thee: haply there may
be in my hand something which shall be a means of deliverance for
thee."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of da, and ceased saying
her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Ninety-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Marzawar
thus addressed Princess Budur, "Tell me concerning thy tale and
what befel thee: haply Allah may inspire me with a means of
deliverance for thee." Quoth she, "O my brother, hear my story
which is this. One night I awoke from sleep, in the last third of
the night [FN#284] and, sitting up, saw by my side the handsomest
of youths that be, and tongue faileth to describe him, for he was
as a willow-wand or an Indian rattan-cane. So methought it was my
father who had done on this wise in order thereby to try me, for
that he had consulted me concerning wedlock, when the Kings
sought me of him to wife, and I had refused. It was this though
withheld me from arousing him, for I feared that, if I did aught
of embraced him, he would peradventure inform my father of m,
doings. But in the morning, I found on my finger his seal-ring,
in place of my own which he had taken. And, O my brother, m,
heart was seized with love of him at first sight; and, for the
violence of my passion and longing, I have never savoured the
taste of sleep and have no occupation save weeping alway and
repeating verses night and day. And this, O my brother, is my
story and the cause of my madness." Then she poured forth tears
and repeated these couplets,

"Now Love hast banished all that bred delight; *
     With that heart-nibbling fawn my joys took flight:
Lightest of trifles lover's blood to him *
     Who wastes the vitals of the hapless wight!
For him I'm jealous of my sight and thought; *
     My heart acts spy upon my thought and sight:
Those long-lashed eyelids rain on me their shafts *
     Guileful, destroying hearts where'er they light:
Now, while my portion in the world endures, *
     Shall I behold him ere I quit world-site?
What bear I for his sake I'd hide, but tears *
     Betray my feelings to the spy's despight.
When near, our union seemeth ever far; *
     When far, my thoughts to him aye nearest are."

And presently she continued, "See then, O my brother, how thou
mayest aid me in mine affliction." So Marzawan bowed his head
ground-wards awhile, wondering and not knowing what to do, then
he raised it and said to her, "All thou hast spoken to me I hold
to be true, though the case of the young man pass my
understanding: but I will go round about all lands and will seek
for what may heal thee; haply Allah shall appoint thy healing to
be at my hand. Meanwhile, take patience and be not disquieted."
Thereupon Marzawan farewelled her, praying that she might be
constant and left her repeating these couplets,

"Thine image ever companies my sprite, *
     For all thou'rt distant from the pilgrim's sight:
But my heart-wishes e'er attract thee near: *
     What is the lightning's speed to Thought's swift flight?
Then go not thou, my very light of eyes *
     Which, when thou'rt gone, lack all the Kohl of light."

Then Marzawan returned to his mother's house, where he passed the
night. And when the morrow dawned, having equipped himself for
his journey, he fared forth and ceased not faring from city to
city and from island to island for a whole month, till he came to
a town named Al-Tayrab. [FN#285] Here he went about scenting news
of the townsfolk, so haply he might light on a cure for the
Princess's malady, for in every capital he entered or passed by,
it was reported that Queen Budur, daughter of King Ghayur, had
lost her wits. But arriving at Al-Tayrab city, he heard that
Kamar al-Zaman, son of King Shahriman, was fallen sick and
afflicted with melancholy madness. So Marzawan asked the name of
the Prince's capital and they said to him, "It is on the Islands
of Khalidan and it lieth distant from our city a whole month's
journey by sea, but by land it is six months' march." So he went
down to the sea in a ship which was bound for the Khalidan Isles,
and she sailed with a favouring breeze for a whole month, till
they came in sight of the capital; and there remained for them
but to make the land when, behold, there came out on them a
tempestuous wind which carried away the masts and rent the
canvas, so that the sails fell into the sea and the ship
capsized, with all on board,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Ninety-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
ship capsized with all on board, each sought his own safety; and
as for Marzawan the set of the sea carried him under the King's
palace, wherein was Kamar al-Zaman. And by the decree of destiny
it so happened that this was the day on which King Shahriman gave
audience to his Grandees and high officers, and he was sitting,
with his son's head on his lap, whilst an eunuch fanned away the
flies; and the Prince had not spoken neither had he eaten nor
drunk for two days, and he was grown thinner than a
spindle. [FN#286] Now the Wazir was standing respectfully a-foot
near the latticed window giving on the sea and, raising his eyes,
saw Marzawan being beaten by the billows and at his last gasp;
whereupon his heart was moved to pity for him, so he drew near to
the King and moving his head towards him said, "I crave thy
leave, O King, to go down to the court of the pavilion and open
the water-gate that I may rescue a man who is at the point of
drowning in the sea and bring him forth of danger into
deliverance; peradventure, on this account Allah may free thy son
from what he hath!" The King replied, "O thou Wazir, enough is
that which hath befallen my son through thee and on shine
account. Haply, if thou rescue this drowning man, he will come to
know our affairs, and look on my son who is in this state and
exult over me; but I swear by Allah, that if this half-drowned
wretch come hither and learn our condition and look upon my son
and then fare forth and speak of our secrets to any, I will
assuredly strike off thy head before his; for thou, O my Minister
art the cause of all that hath betided us, first and last. Now do
as thou wilt." Thereupon the Wazir sprang up and, opening the
private pastern which gave upon the sea, descended to the
causeway; then walked on twenty steps and came to the water where
he saw Marzawan nigh unto death. So he put out his hand to him
and, catching him by his hair, drew him ashore in a state of
insensibility, with belly full of water and eyes half out of his
head. The Wazir waited till he came to himself, when he pulled
off his wet clothes and clad him in a fresh suit, covering his
head with one of his servants' turbands; after which he said to
him, Know that I have been the means of saving thee from
drowning: do not thou requite me by causing my death and shine
own."éAnd Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Ninety-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Wazir did to Marzawan what he did, he thus addressed him Know
that I have been the cause of saving thee from drowning so
requite me not by causing my death and shine own." Asked
Marzawan, And how so?"; and the Wazir answered, "Thou art at this
hour about to go up and pass among Emirs and Wazirs all of them
silent and none speaking, because of Kamar al-Zaman the son of
the Sultan." Now when Marzawan heard the name of Kamar al-Zaman,
he knew that this was he whom he had heard spoken of in sundry
cities and of whom he came in search, but he feigned ignorance
and asked the Wazir, "And who is Kamar al-Zaman? Answered the
Minister, "He is the son of Sultan Shahriman and he is sore sick
and lieth strown on his couch restless alway, eating not nor
drinking neither sleeping night or day; indeed he is nigh upon
death and we have lost hope of his living and are certain that he
is dying. Beware lest thou look too long on him, or thou look on
any other than that where thou settest thy feet: else thou art a
lost man, and I also." He replied, "Allah upon thee, O Wazir, I
implore thee, of thy favour, acquaint me touching this youth thou
describest, what is the cause of the condition in which he is."
The Wazir replied, "I know none, save that, three years ago, his
father required him to wed, but he refused; whereat the King was
wroth and imprisoned him. And when he awoke on the morrow, he
fancied that during the night he had been roused from sleep and
had seen by his side a young lady of passing loveliness, whose
charms tongue can never express; and he assured us that he had
plucked off her seal-ring from her finger and had put it on his
own and that she had done likewise; but we know not the secret of
all this business. So by Allah, O my son, when thou comest up
with me into the palace, look not on the Prince, but go thy way;
for the Sultan's heart is full of wrath against me." So said
Marzawan to himself, "By Allah; this is the one I sought!" Then
he followed the Wazir up to the palace, where the Minister seated
himself at the Prince's feet; but Marzawan found forsooth nothing
to do but go up to Kamar al-Zaman and stand before him at gaze.
Upon this the Wazir, died of affright in his skin, and kept
looking at Marzawan and signalling him to wend his way; but he
feigned not to see him and gave not over gazing upon Kamar al-
Zaman, till he was well assured that it was indeed he whom he was
seeking,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to
say her permitted say.

     When it was the One Hundred and Ninety-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Marzawan looked upon Kamar al-Zaman and knew that it was indeed
he whom he was seeking, he cried, "Exalted be Allah, Who hath
made his shape even as her shape and his complexion as her
complexion and his cheek as her cheek!'' Upon this Kamar al-Zaman
opened his eyes and gave earnest ear to his speech; and, when
Marzawan saw him inclining to hear, he repeated these
couplets [FN#287],

"I see thee full of song and plaint and love's own ecstasy;
Delighting in describing all the charms of loveliness:

Art smit by stroke of Love or hath shaft-shot wounded thee?
None save the wounded ever show such signals of distress!

Ho thou! crown the wine cup and sing me singular
Praises to Sulayma, Al-Rabab, Tan'oum addrest; [FN#288]

Go round the grape-vine sun [FN#289] which for mansion hath a jar;
Whose East the cup boy is, and here my mouth that opes for West.

I'm jealous of the very clothes that dare her sides enroll
When she veils her dainty body of the delicatest grace:

I envy every goblet of her lips that taketh toll
When she sets the kissing cup on that sweetest kissing-place.

But deem not by the keen-edged scymitar I'm slain--
The hurts and harms I dree are from arrows of her eyes.

I found her finger tips, as I met her once again,
Deep-reddened with the juice of the wood that ruddy dyes; [FN#290]

And cried, 'Thy palms thou stainedst when far away was I
And this is how thou payest one distracted by his pine!'

Quoth she (enkindling in my heart a flame that burned high
Speaking as one who cannot hide of longing love the sign),

'By thy life, this is no dye used for dyeing; so forbear
Thy blame, nor in charging me with falsing Love persist!

But when upon our parting-day I saw thee haste to fare,
The while were bared my hand and my elbow and my wrist;

'I shed a flood of blood-red tears and with fingers brushed away;
Hence blood-reddened were the tips and still blood-red they
     remain.'

Had I wept before she wept, to my longing-love a prey,
Before repentance came, I had quit my soul of pain;

But she wept before I wept and I wept to see her care
And I said, 'All the merit to precedent;' [FN#291]

Blame me not for loving her, now on self of Love I swear
For her sake, for her only, these pains my soul torment.

She hath all the lere of Lukman [FN#292] and Yusuf's beauty lief;
Sweet singer David's voice and Maryam's chastity:

While I've all Jacob's mourning and Jonah's prison-grief,
And the sufferings of Job and old Adam's history:

Yet kill her not, albeit of my love for her I die;
But ask her why my blood to her was lawful. ask her why?"

When Marzawan recited this ode, the words fell upon Kamar al-
Zaman's heart as freshness after fever and returning health; and
he sighed and, turning his tongue in his mouth, said to his sire,
"O my father, let this youth come and sit by my side."--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Ninety-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kamar al-
Zaman said to his sire, "O my father, allow this youth to come
and sit by my side." Now when the King heard these words from his
son, he rejoiced with exceeding joy, though at the first his
heart had been set against Marzawan and he had determined that
the stranger's head needs must be stricken off: but when he heard
Kamar al-Zaman speak, his anger left him and he arose and drawing
Marzawan to him, seated him by his son and turning to him said,
"Praised be Allah for thy safety!" He replied, "Allah preserve
thee! and preserve thy son to thee!" and called down blessings on
the King. Then the King asked, "From what country art thou?"; and
he answered, "From the Islands of the Inland Sea, the kingdom of
King Ghayur, Lord of the Isles and the Seas and the Seven
Palaces." Quoth King Shahriman, "Maybe thy coming shall be
blessed to my son and Allah vouchsafe to heal what is in him."
Quoth Marzawan, "Inshallah, naught shall be save what shall be
well!" Then turning to Kamar al-Zaman, he said to him in his ear
unheard of the King and his court, 'O my lord! be of good cheer,
and hearten thy heart and let shine eyes be cool and clear and,
with respect to her for whose sake thou art thus, ask not of her
case on shine account. But thou keptest thy secret and fellest
sick, while she told her secret and they said she had gone mad;
so she is now in prison, with an iron chain about her neck, in
most piteous plight; but, Allah willing, the healing of both of
you shall come from my hand." Now when Kamar al-Zaman heard these
words, his life returned to him and he took heart and felt a
thrill of joy and signed to his father to help him sit up; and
the King was like to fly for gladness and rose hastily and lifted
him up. Presently, of his fear for his son, he shook the kerchief
of dismissal [FN#293]; and all the Emirs and Wazirs withdrew; then
he set two pillows for his son to lean upon, after which he bade
them perfume the palace with saffron and decorate the city,
saying to Marzawan, "By Allah, O my son, of a truth shine aspect
be a lucky and a blessed!" And he made as much of him as he might
and called for food, and when they brought it, Marzawan came up
to the Prince and said, "Rise, eat with me." So he obeyed him and
ate with him, and all the while the King invoked blessings on
Marzawan and said, "How auspicious is thy coming, O my son!" And
when the father saw his boy eat, his joy and gladness redoubled,
and he went out and told the Prince's mother and all the
household. Then he spread throughout the palace the good news of
the Prince's recovery and the King commanded the decoration of
the city and it was a day of high festival. Marzawan passed that
night with Kamar al-Zaman, and the King also slept with them in
joy and delight for his son's recovery.--And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the One Hundred and Ninety-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that King
Shahriman also passed that night with them in the excess of his
joy for his son's recovery. And when the next morning dawned, and
the King had gone away and the two young men were left alone,
Kamar al-Zaman told his story from beginning to end to Marzawan
who said, "In very sooth I know her with whom thou didst
foregather; her name is the Princess Budur and she is daughter to
King Ghayur." Then he related to him all that had passed with the
Princess from first to last and acquainted him with the excessive
love she bore him, saying, "All that befel thee with thy father
hath befallen her with hers, and thou art without doubt her
beloved, even as she is shine; so brace up thy resolution and
take heart, for I will bring thee to her and unite you both anon
and deal with you even as saith the poet,

"Albe to lover adverse be his love, *
     And show aversion howso may he care;
Yet will I manage that their persons [FN#294] meet, *
     E'en as the pivot of a scissor pair."

And he ceased not to comfort and solace and encourage Kamar al-
Zaman and urged him to eat and drink till he ate food and drank
wine, and life returned to him and he was saved from his ill
case; and Marzawan cheered him and diverted him with talk and
songs and stories, and in good time he became free of his
disorder and stood up and sought to go to the Hammam. [FN#295] So
Marzawan took him by the hand and both went to the bath, where
they washed their bodies and made them clean.--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

              When it was the Two Hundredth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Kamar
al-Zaman, son of King Shahriman, went to the Hammam, his father
in his joy at this event freed the prisoners, and presented
splendid dresses to his grandees and bestowed large alm-gifts
upon the poor and bade decorate the city seven days. Then quoth
Marzawan to Kamar al-Zaman, "Know, O my lord, that I came not
from the Lady Budur save for this purpose, and the object of my
journey was to deliver her from her present case; and it
remaineth for us only to devise how we may get to her, since thy
father cannot brook the thought of parting from thee. So it is my
counsel that to-morrow thou ask his leave to go abroad hunting.
Then do thou take with thee a pair of saddle-bags full of money
and mount a swift steed, and lead a spare horse, and I will do
the like, and say to thy sire, 'I have a mind to divert myself
with hunting the desert and to see the open country and there to
pass one night.' Suffer not any servant to follow us, for as soon
as we reach the open country, we will go our ways." Kamar al-
Zaman rejoiced in this plan with great joy and cried, "It is
good." Then he stiffened his back and, going in to his father,
sought his leave and spoke as he had been taught, and the King
consented to his going forth a-hunting and said, "O my son,
blessed be the day that restoreth thee to health! I will not
gainsay thee in this; but pass not more than one night in the
desert and return to me on the morrow; for thou knowest that life
is not good to me without thee, and indeed I can hardly believe
thee to be wholly recovered from what thou hadst, [FN#296] because
thou art to me as he of whom quoth the poet,

'Albe by me I had through day and night *
     Solomon's carpet and the Chosroes' might,
Both were in value less than wing of gnat, *
     Unless these eyne could hold thee aye in sight.'" [FN#297]

Then the King equipped his son Kamar al-Zaman and Marzawan for
the excursion, bidding make ready for them four horses, together
with a dromedary to carry the money and a camel to bear the water
and belly timber; and Kamar al-Zaman forbade any of his
attendants to follow him. His father farewelled him and pressed
him to his breast and kissed him, saying, "I ask thee in the name
of Allah, be not absent from me more than one night, wherein
sleep will be unlawful to me, for I am even as saith the poet,

'Thou present, in the Heaven of heavens I dwell; *
     Bearing shine absence is of hells my Hell:
Pledged be for thee my soul! If love for thee *
     Be crime, my crime is of the fellest fell.
Does love-lowe burn thy heart as burns it mine, *
     Doomed night and day Gehenna-fire to smell?'"

Answered Kamar al-Zaman, "O my father, Inshallah, I will lie
abroad but one night!" Then he took leave of him, and he and
Marzawan mounted and leading the spare horses, the dromedary with
the money and the camel with the water and victual, turned their
faces towards the open country;--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawning day and ceased saying her permitted say.

          When it was the Two Hundred and First Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kamar al-
Zaman and Marzawan fared forth and turned their faces towards the
open country; and they travelled from the first of the day till
nightfall, when they halted and ate and drank and fed their
beasts and rested awhile; after which they again took horse and
ceased not journeying for three days, and on the fourth they came
to a spacious tract wherein was a thicket. They alighted in it
and Marzawan, taking the camel and one of the horses, slaughtered
them and cut off their flesh and stripped their bones. Then he
doffed from Kamar al-Zaman his shirt and trousers which he
smeared with the horse's blood and he took the Prince's coat
which he tore to shreds and befouled with gore; and he cast them
down in the fork of the road. Then they ate and drank and
mounting set forward again; and, when Kamar al- Zaman asked why
this was done, and said, "What is this O my brother, and how
shall it profit us?"; Marzawan replied, "Know that thy father,
when we have outstayed the second night after the night for which
we had his leave, and yet we return not, will mount and follow in
our track till he come hither; and, when he happeneth upon this
blood which I have spilt and he seeth thy shirt and trousers rent
and gore-fouled, he will fancy that some accident befel thee from
bandits or wild-beasts, so he will give up hope of thee and
return to his city, and by this device we shall win our wishes."
Quoth Kamar al-Zaman, "By Allah, this be indeed a rare device!
Thou hast done right well.'' [FN#298] Then the two fared on days
and nights and all that while Kamar al-Zaman did naught but
complain when he found himself alone, and he ceased not weeping
till they drew near their journeys end, when he rejoiced and
repeated these verses,

"Wilt tyrant play with truest friend who thinks of thee each
     hour, * And after showing love-desire betray indifference?
May I forfeit every favour if in love I falsed thee, *
     If thee I left, abandon me by way of recompense:
But I've been guilty of no crime such harshness to deserve, *
     And if I aught offended thee I bring my penitence;
Of Fortune's wonders one it is thou hast abandoned me, *
     But Fortune never wearieth of showing wonderments."

When he had made an end of his verses, Marzawan said to him,
"Look! these be King Ghayur's Islands;" whereat Kamar al-Zaman
joyed with exceeding joy and thanked him for what he had done,
and kissed him between the eyes and strained him--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

         When it was the Two Hundred and Second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Marzawan said "Look! these be the Islands of King Ghayur;" Kamar
al-Zaman joyed with exceeding joy and thanked him for what he had
done and kissed him between the eyes and strained him to his
bosom. And after reaching the Islands and entering the city they
took up their lodging in a khan, where they rested three days
from the fatigues of their wayfare; after which Marzawan carried
Kamar al-Zaman to the bath and, clothing him in merchant's gear,
provided him with a geomantic tablet of gold, [FN#299] with a set
of astrological instruments and with an astrolabe of silver,
plated with gold. Then he said to him, "Arise, O my lord, and
take thy stand under the walls of the King's palace and cry out,
'I am the ready Reckoner; I am the Scrivener; I am he who weeteth
the Sought and the Seeker; I am the finished man of Science; I am
the Astrologer accomplished in experience! Where then is he that
seeketh?' As soon as the King heareth this, he will send after
thee and carry thee in to his daughter the Princess Budur, thy
lover; but when about going in to her do thou say to him, 'Grant
me three days' delay, and if she recover, give her to me to wife;
and if not, deal with me as thou dealest with those who forewent
me.' He will assuredly agree to this, so as soon as thou art
alone with her, discover thyself to her; and when she seeth thee,
she will recover strength and her madness will cease from her and
she will be made whole in one night. Then do thou give her to eat
and drink. and her father, rejoicing in her recovery, will marry
thee to her and share his kingdom with thee; for he hath imposed
on himself this condition and so peace be upon thee." Now when
Kamar al-Zaman heard these words he exclaimed, "May I never lack
thy benefits!", and, taking the set of instruments aforesaid,
sallied forth from the caravanserai in the dress of his order. He
walked on till he stood under the walls of King Ghayur's palace,
where he began to cry out, saying, "I am the Scribe, I am the
ready Reckoner, I am he who knoweth the Sought and the Seeker; I
am he who openeth the Volume and summeth up the Sums; [FN#300] who
Dreams can expound whereby the sought is found! Where then is the
seeker?" Now when the city people heard this, they flocked to
him, for it was long since they had seen Scribe or Astrologer,
and they stood round him and, looking upon him, they saw one in
the prime of beauty and grace and perfect elegance, and they
marvelled at his loveliness, and his fine stature and symmetry.
Presently one of them accosted him and said, "Allah upon thee, O
thou fair and young, with the eloquent tongue! incur not this
affray; nor throw thy life away in thine ambition to marry the
Princess Budur. Only cast shine eyes upon yonder heads hung up;
all their owners have lost their lives in this same venture." Yet
Kamar al-Zaman paid no heed to them, but cried out at the top of
his voice, saying, "I am the Doctor, the Scrivener! I am the
Astrologer, the Calculator!" And all the townsfolk forbade him
from this, but he regarded them not at all, saying in his mind,
"None knoweth desire save whoso suffereth it." Then he began
again to cry his loudest, shouting, "I am the Scrivener, I am the
Astrologer!"--And Shahrazad per ceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

          When it was the Two Hundred and Third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kamar al-
Zaman in no wise heeded the words of the citizens, but continued
to cry out, "I am the Calculator! I am the Astrologer!" Thereupon
all the townsfolk were wroth with him and said to him, "Thou art
nothing but an imbecile, silly, self-willed lad! Have pity on
shine own youth and tender years and beauty and loveliness." But
he cried all the more, "I am the Astrologer, I am the Calculator!
Is there any one that seeketh?" As he was thus crying and the
people forbidding him, behold, King Ghayur heard his voice and
the clamour of the lieges and said to his Wazir, "Go down and
bring me yon Astrologer." So the Wazir, went down in haste, and
taking Kamar al-Zaman from the midst of the crowd led him up to
the King; and when in the presence he kissed the ground and began
versifying,

"Eight glories meet, all, all conjoined in thee, *
     Whereby may Fortune aye thy servant be:
Lere, lordliness, grace, generosity; *
     Plain words, deep meaning, honour, victory!"

When the King looked upon him, he seated him by his side and said
to him, "By Allah, O my son, an thou be not an astrologer,
venture not thy life nor comply with my condition; for I have
bound myself that whoso goeth in to my daughter and healeth her
not of that which hath befallen her I will strike off his head;
but whoso healeth her him I will marry to her. So let not thy
beauty and loveliness delude thee: for, by Allah! and again, by
Allah! If thou cure her not, I will assuredly cut off thy head."
And Kamar al-Zaman replied, "This is thy right; and I consent,
for I wot of this ere came I hither." Then King Ghayur took the
Kazis to witness against him and delivered him to the eunuch,
saying, "Carry this one to the Lady Budur." So the eunuch took
him by the hand and led him along the passage; but Kamar al-Zaman
outstripped him and pushed on before, whilst the eunuch ran after
him, saying, "Woe to thee! Hasten not to shine own ruin: never
yet saw I astrologer so eager for his proper destruction; but
thou weetest not what calamities are before thee." Thereupon
Kamar al-Zaman turned away his face from the eunuch,--And Shah
razed perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted
say.

         When it was the Two Hundred and Fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
eunuch thus addressed Kamar al-Zaman, "Patience, and no indecent
hurry!"; the Prince turned away his face and began repeating
these couplets,

"A Sage, I feel a fool before thy charms; *
     Distraught, I wot not what the words I say:
If say I 'Sun,' away thou dost not pass *
     From eyes of me, while suns go down with day:
Thou hast completed Beauty, in whose praise *
     Speech-makers fail, and talkers lose their way."

Then the eunuch stationed Kamar al-Zaman behind the curtain of
the Princess's door and the Prince said to him, "Which of the two
ways will please thee more, treat and cure thy lady from here or
go in and heal her within the curtain?" The eunuch marvelled at
his words and answered, "An thou heal her from here it were
better proof of thy skill." Upon this Kamar al-Zaman sat down
behind the curtain and, taking out ink case, pen and paper, wrote
the following: "This is the writ of one whom passion swayeth,*
and whom longing waylayeth * and wakeful misery slayeth * one who
despaireth of living * and looketh for naught but dying * with
whose mourning heart * nor comforter nor helper taketh part * One
whose sleepless eyes * none succoureth from anxieties * whose day
is passed in fire * and his night in torturing desire * whose
body is wasted for much emaciation * and no messenger from his
beloved bringeth him consolation." And after this he indited the
following couplets,

"I write with heart devoted to thy thought, *
     And eyelids chafed by tears of blood they bled;
And body clad, by loving pine and pain, *
     In shirt of leanness, and worn down to thread,
To thee complain I of Love's tormentry, *
     Which ousted hapless Patience from her stead:
A toi! show favour and some mercy deign, *
     For Passion's cruel hands my vitals shred."

And beneath his lines he wrote these cadenced sentences, "The
heart's pain is removed * by union with the beloved * and whomso
his lover paineth * only Allah assaineth! * If we or you have
wrought deceit * may the deceiver win defeat! * There is naught
goodlier than a lover who keeps faith * with the beloved who
works him scathe." Then, by way of subscription, he wrote, "From
the distracted and despairing man * whom love and longing trepan
* from the lover under passion's ban * the prisoner of transport
and distraction * from this Kamar al-Zaman * son of Shahriman *
to the peerless one * of the fair Houris the pearl-union * to the
Lady Budur * daughter of King Al Ghayur * Know thou that by night
I am sleepless * and by day in distress * consumed with
increasing wasting and pain * and longing and love unfain *
abounding in sighs * with tear flooded eyes * by passion captive
ta'en * of Desire the slain * with heart seared by the parting of
us twain * the debtor of longing bane, of sickness cup-companion
* I am the sleepless one, who never closeth eye * the slave of
love, whose tears run never dry * for the fire of my heart is
still burning * and never hidden is the flame of my yearning."
Then on the margin Kamar al-Zaman wrote this admired verse,

"Salem from graces hoarded by my Lord *
     To her, who holds my heart and soul in hoard!"

And also these,

"Pray'ee grant me some words from your lips, belike *
     Such mercy may comfort and cool these eyne:
From the stress of my love and my pine for you, *
     I make light of what makes me despised, indign:
Allah guard a folk whose abode was far, *
     And whose secret I kept in the holiest shrine:
Now Fortune in kindness hath favoured me *
     Thrown on threshold dust of this love o' mine:
By me bedded I looked on Budur, whose sun *
     The moon of my fortunes hath made to shine."

Then, having affixed his seal-ring to the missive, he wrote these
couplets in the place of address,

"Ask of my writ what wrote my pen in dole, *
     And hear my tale of misery from this scroll;
My hand is writing while my tears down flow, *
     And to the paper 'plains my longing soul:
My tears cease not to roll upon this sheet, *
     And if they stopped I'd cause blood-gouts to roll."

And at the end he added this other verse,

"I've sent the ring from off thy finger bore *
     I when we met, now deign my ring restore!"

Then Kamar al-Zaman set the Lady Budur's ring inside the letter
and sealed it and gave it to the eunuch, who took it and went in
with it to his mistress.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased to say her permitted say.

          When it was the Two Hundred and Fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kamar al-
Zaman, after setting the seal-ring inside the epistle, gave it to
the eunuch who took it and went in with it to his mistress; and,
when the Lady Budur opened it, she found therein her own very
ring. Then she read the paper and when she understood its purport
and knew that it was from her beloved, and that he in person
stood behind the curtain, her reason began to fly and her breast
swelled for joy and rose high; and she repeated these couplets,

"Long, long have I bewailed the sev'rance of our loves, *
     With tears that from my lids streamed down like burning
     rain;
And vowed that, if the days deign reunite us two, *
     My lips should never speak of severance again:
Joy hath o'erwhelmed me so that, for the very stress *
     Of that which gladdens me to weeping I am fain.
Tears are become to you a habit, O my eyes, *
     So that ye weep as well for gladness as for pain.'' [FN#301]

And having finished her verse, the Lady Budur stood up forthwith
and, firmly setting her feet to the wall, strained with all her
might upon the collar of iron, till she brake it from her neck
and snapped the chains. Then going forth from behind the curtain
she threw herself on Kamar al-Zaman and kissed him on the mouth,
like a pigeon feeding its young. [FN#302] And she embraced him
with all the stress of her love and longing and said to him, "O
my lord do I wake or sleep and hath the Almighty indeed
vouchsafe] us reunion after disunion? Laud be to Allah who hath
our loves repaired, even after we despaired!" Now when the eunuch
saw her in this case, he went off running to King Ghayur and,
kissing the ground before him, said, "O my lord, know that this
Astrologer is indeed the Shaykh of all astrologers, who are fools
to him, all of them; for verily he hath cured thy daughter while
standing behind the curtain and without going in to her." Quoth
the King, "Look well to it, is this news true?" Answered the
eunuch, "O my lord, rise and come and see for thyself how she
hath found strength to break the iron chains and is come forth to
the Astrologer, kissing and embracing him." Thereupon the King
arose and went in to his daughter who, when she saw him, stood up
in haste and covered her head, [FN#303] and recited these two
couplets,

"The toothstick love I not; for when I say, *
     'Siwak,' [FN#304] I miss thee, for it sounds 'Siwa-ka'.
The caper-tree I love; for when I say, *
     'Arak' [FN#305] it sounds I look on thee, 'Ara-ka.'"

Thereupon the King was so transported for joy at her recovery
that he felt like to fly and kissed her between the eyes, for he
loved her with dearest love; then, turning to Kamar al-Zaman, he
asked him who he was, and said, "What countryman art thou?" So
the Prince told him his name and rank, and informed him that he
was the son of King Shahriman, and presently related to him the
whole story from beginning to end; and acquainted him with what
happened between himself and the Lady Budur; and how he had taken
her seal-ring from her finger and had placed it on his own;
whereat Ghayur marvelled and said, "Verily your story deserveth
in books to be chronicled, and when you are dead and gone age
after age be read." Then he summoned Kazis and witnesses
forthright and married the Lady Budur to Prince Kamar al-Zaman;
after which he bade decorate the city seven days long. So they
spread the tables with all manner of meats, whilst the drums beat
and the criers anounced the glad tidings, and all the troops
donned their richest clothes; and they illuminated the city and
held high festival. Then Kamar al-Zaman went in to the Lady Budur
and the King rejoiced in her recovery and in her marriage; and
praised Allah for that He had made her to fall in love with a
goodly youth of the sons of Kings. So they unveiled her and
displayed the bride before the bridegroom; and both were the
living likeness of each other in beauty and comeliness and grace
and love-allurement. Then Kamar al-Zaman lay with her that night
and took his will of her, whilst she in like manner fulfilled her
desire of him and enjoyed his charms and grace; and they slept in
each other's arms till the morning. On the morrow, the King made
a wedding-feast to which he gathered all comers from the Islands
of the Inner and Outer Seas, and he spread the tables with
choicest viands nor ceased the banquetting for a whole month. Now
when Kamar al-Zaman had thus fulfilled his will and attained his
inmost desire, and whenas he had tarried awhile with the Princess
Budur, he bethought him of his father, King Shahriman, and saw
him in a dream, saying, "O my son, is it thus thou dealest with
me?" and recited in the vision these two couplets,

"Indeed to watch the darkness-moon he blighted me, *
     And to star-gaze through longsome night he plighted me:
Easy, my heart! for haply he'll unite with thee; *
     And patience, Sprite! with whatso ills he dight to thee."

Now after seeing his father in the dream and hearing his re
preaches, Kamar al-Zaman awoke in the morning, afflicted and
troubled, whereupon the Lady Budur questioned him and he told her
what he had seen.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

          When it was the Two Hundred and Sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Kamar
al-Zaman acquainted the Lady Budur with what he had seen in his
dream, she and he went in to her sire and, telling him what had
passed, besought his leave to travel. He gave the Prince the
permission he sought; but the Princess said, "O my father, I
cannot bear to be parted from him." Quoth Ghayur, her sire, "Then
go thou with him," and gave her leave to be absent a whole
twelvemonth and afterwards to visit him in every year once; so
she kissed his hand and Kamar al-Zaman did the like. Thereupon
King Ghayur proceeded to equip his daughter and her bridegroom
for the journey, and furnished them with outfit and appointments
for the march; and brought out of his stables horses marked with
his own brand, blood-dromedaries [FN#306] which can journey ten
days without water, and prepared a litter for his daughter,
besides loading mules and camels with victual; moreover, he gave
them slaves and eunuchs to serve them and all manner of
travellinggear; and on the day of departure, when King Ghayur
took leave of Kamar al-Zaman, he bestowed on him ten splendid
suits of cloth of gold embroidered with stones of price, together
with ten riding horses and ten she-camels, and a treasury of
money; [FN#307] and he charged him to love and cherish his
daughter the Lady Budur. Then the King accompanied them to the
farthest limits of his Islands where, going in to his daughter
Budur in the litter, he kissed her and strained her to his bosom,
weeping and repeating,

"O thou who wooest Severance, easy fare! *
     For love-embrace belongs to lover-friend:
Fare softly! Fortune's nature falsehood is, *
     And parting shall love's every meeting end."

Then leaving his daughter, he went to her husband and bade him
farewell and kissed him; after which he parted from them and,
giving the order for the march he returned to his capital with
his troops. The Prince and Princess and their suite fared on
without stopping through the first day and the second and the
third and the fourth, nor did they cease faring for a whole month
till they came to a spacious champaign, abounding in pasturage,
where they pitched their tents; and they ate and drank and
rested, and the Princess Budur lay down to sleep. Presently,
Kamar al-Zaman went in to her and found her lying asleep clad in
a shift of apricot-coloured silk that showed all and everything;
and on her head was a coif of gold-cloth embroidered with pearls
and jewels. The breeze raised her shift which laid bare her navel
and showed her breasts and displayed a stomach whiter than snow,
each one of whose dimples would contain an ounce of benzoin-
ointment. [FN#308] At this sight, his love and longing redoubled,
and he began reating,

"An were it asked me when by hell-fire burnt, *
     When flames of heart my vitals hold and hem,
'Which wouldst thou chose, say wouldst thou rather them, *
     Or drink sweet cooling draught?' I'd answer, 'Them!' "

Then he put his hand to the band of her petticoat-trousers and
drew it and loosed it, for his soul lusted after her, when he saw
a jewel, red as dye-wood, made fast to the band. He untied it and
examined it and, seeing two lines of writing graven thereon, in a
character not to be read, marvelled and said in his mind, "Were
not this bezel something to her very dear she had not bound it to
her trousers-band nor hidden it in the most privy and precious
place about her person, that she might not be parted from it.
Would I knew what she cloth with this and what is the secret that
is in it." So saying, he took it and went outside the tent to
look at it in the light,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day, and ceased to say her permitted say.

         When it was the Two Hundred and Seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when he
took the bezel to look at it in the light, the while he was
holding it behold, a bird swooped down on him and, snatching the
same from his hand, flew off with it and then lighted on the
ground. There-upon Kamar al-Zaman fearing to lose the jewel, ran
after the bird; but it flew on before him, keeping just out of
his reach, and ceased not to draw him on from dale to dale and
from hill to hill, till the night starkened and the firmament
darkened, when it roosted on a high tree. So Kamar al-Zaman
stopped under the tree confounded in thought and faint for famine
and fatigue, and giving himself up for lost, would have turned
back, but knew not the way whereby he came, for that darkness had
overtaken him. Then he exclaimed, "There is no Majesty and there
is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious the Great!"; and laying
him down under the tree (whereon was the bird) slept till the
morning, when he awoke and saw the bird also wake up and fly
away. He arose and walked after it, and it flew on little by
little before him, after the measure of his faring; at which he
smiled and said, "By Allah, a strange thing! Yesterday, this bird
flew before me as fast as I could run, and to-day, knowing that I
have awoke tired and cannot run, he flieth after the measure of
my faring. By Allah, this is wonderful! But I must needs follow
this bird whether it lead me to death or to life; and I will go
wherever it goeth, for at all events it will not abide save in
some inhabited land. [FN#309] So he continued to follow the bird
which roosted every night upon a tree; and he ceased not pursuing
it for a space of ten days, feeding on the fruits of the earth
and drinking of its waters. At the end of this time, he came in
sight of an inhabited city, whereupon the bird darted off like
the glance of the eye and, entering the town, disappeared from
Kamar al-Zaman, who knew not what it meant or whither it was
gone; so he marvelled at this and exclaimed, "Praise be to Allah
who hath brought me in safety to this city!" Then he sat down by
a stream and washed his hands and feet and face and rested
awhile; and, recalling his late easy and pleasant life of union
with his beloved and contrasting it with his present plight of
trouble and fatigue and distress and strangerhood and famine and
severance, the tears streamed from his eyes and he began
repeating these cinquains,

"Pain had I hid thy handwork, but it showed, *
     Changed sleep for wake, and wake with me abode:
When thou didst spurn my heart I cried aloud *
     Pate, hold thy hand and cease to gird and goad:
          In dole and danger aye my sprite I spy!

An but the Lord of Love were just to me, *
     Sleep fro' my eyelids ne'er were forced to flee.
Pity, my lady, one for love o' thee *
     Prom his tribes darling brought to low degree:
          Love came and doomed Wealth beggar-death to die.

The railers chide at thee: I ne'er gainsay, *
     But stop my ears and dumbly sign them Nay:
'Thou lov'st a slender may,' say they; I say, *
     'I've picked her out and cast the rest away:'
          Enough; when Fate descends she blinds man's
          eye!" [FN#310]

And as soon as he had finished his poetry and had taken his rest,
he rose and walked on little by little, till he entered the
city.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

         When it was the Two Hundred and Eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that as soon as
Kamar al-Zaman had finished his poetry and had taken his rest, he
arose and entered the city-gate [FN#311] not knowing whither he
should wend. He crossed the city from end to end, entering by the
land-gate, and ceased not faring on till he came out at the sea-
gate, for the city stood on the sea-shore. Yet he met not a
single one of its citizens. And after issuing from the land-gate
he fared forwards and ceased not faring till he found himself
among the orchards and gardens of the place; and, passing among
the trees presently came to a garden and stopped before its door;
where-upon the keeper came out to him and saluted him. The Prince
returned his greeting and the gardener bade him welcome, saying,
"Praised be Allah that thou hast come off safe from the dwellers
of this city! Quick, come into the garth, ere any of the townfolk
see thee." Thereupon Kamar al-Zaman entered that garden,
wondering in mind, and asked the keeper, "What may be the history
of the people of this city and who may they be?" The other
answered, "Know that the people of this city are all Magians: but
Allah upon thee, tell me how thou camest to this city and what
caused thy coming to our capital." Accordingly Kamar al-Zaman
told the gardener all that had befallen him from beginning to
end, whereat he marvelled with great marvel and said, "Know, O my
son, that the cities of Al-Islam lie far from us; and between us
and them is a four months' voyage by sea and a whole twelve
months' journey by land. We have a ship which saileth every year
with merchandise to the nearest Moslem country and which entereth
the seas of the Ebony Islands and thence maketh the Khalidan
Islands, the dominions of King Shahriman." Thereupon Kamar al-
Zaman considered awhile and concluded that he could not do better
than abide in the garden with the gardener and become his
assistant, receiving for pay one fourth of the produce. So he
said to him, "Wilt thou take me into thy service, to help thee in
this garden?" Answered the gardener, "To hear is to consent;" and
began teaching him to lead the water to the roots of the trees.
So Kamar al-Zaman abode with him, watering the trees and hoeing
up the weeds and wearing a short blue frock which reached to his
knees. And he wept floods of tears; for he had no rest day or
night, by reason of his strangerhood and he ceased not to repeat
verses upon his beloved, amongst others the following couplets,

"Ye promised us and will ye not keep plight? *
     Ye said a say and shall not deed be dight?
We wake for passion while ye slumber and sleep; *
     Watchers and wakers claim not equal right:
We vowed to keep our loves in secrecy, *
     But spake the meddler and you spoke forthright:
O friend in pain and pleasure, joy and grief, *
     In all case you, you only, claim my sprite!
Mid folk is one who holds my prisoned heart; *
     Would he but show some ruth for me to sight.
Not every eye like mine is wounded sore, *
     Not every heart like mine love-pipings blight:
Ye wronged me saying, Love is wrongous aye *
     Yea! ye were right, events have proved that quite.
Forget they one love-thralled, whose faith the world *
     Robs not, though burn the fires in heart alight:
If an my foeman shall become my judge, *
     Whom shall I sue to remedy his despight?
Had not I need of love nor love had sought, *
     My heart forsure were not thus love-distraught."

Such was the case with Kamar al-Zaman; but as regards his wife,
the Lady Budur, when she awoke she sought her husband and found
him not: then she saw her petticoat-trousers undone, for the band
had been loosed and the bezel lost, whereupon she said to
herself, "By Allah, this is strange! Where is my husband? It
would seem as if he had taken the talisman and gone away, knowing
not the secret which is in it. Would to Heaven I knew whither can
he have wended! But it must needs have been some extraordinary
matter that drew him away, for he cannot brook to leave me a
moment. Allah curse the stone and damn its hour!" Then she
considered awhile and said in her mind, "If I go out and tell the
varlets and let them learn that my husband is lost they will lust
after me: there is no help for it but that I use stratagem. So
she rose and donned some of her husband's clothes and riding-
boots, and a turband like his, drawing one corner of it across
her face for a mouth-veil. [FN#312] Then, setting a slave-girl in
her litter, she went forth from the tent and called to the pages
who brought her Kamar al-Zaman's steed; and she mounted and bade
them load the beasts and resume the march. So they bound on the
burdens and departed; and she concealed her trick, none doubting
but she was Kamar al-Zaman, for she favoured him in face and
form; nor did she cease journeying, she and her suite, days and
nights, till they came in sight of a city overlooking the Salt
Sea, where they pitched their tents without the walls and halted
to rest. The Princess asked the name of the town and was told,
"It is called the City of Ebony; its King is named Armanus, and
he hath a daughter Hayat al-Nufus [FN#313] hight,"--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

          When it was the Two Hundred and Ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Lady Budur halted within sight of the Ebony City to take her
rest, King Armanus sent a messenger, to learn what King it was
who had encamped without his capital; so the messenger, coming to
the tents, made inquiry anent their King, and was told that she
was a King's son who had lost the way being bound for the
Khalidan Islands; whereupon he returned to King Armanus with the
tidings; and, when the King heard them, he straightway rode out
with the lords of his land to greet the stranger on arrival. As
he drew near the tents the Lady Budur came to meet him on foot,
whereupon the King alighted and they saluted each other. Then he
took her to the city and, bringing her up to the palace, bade
them spread the tables and trays of food and commanded them to
transport her company and baggage to the guess house. So they
abode there three days; at the end of which time the King came in
to the Lady Budur. Now she had that day gone to the Hammam and
her face shone as the moon at its full, a seduction to the world
and a rending of the veil of shame to mankind; and Armanus found
her clad in a -suit of silk, embroidered with gold and jewels; so
he said to her, 'O my son, know that I am a very old man,
decrepit withal, and Allah hath blessed me with no child save one
daughter, who resembleth thee in beauty and grace; and I am now
waxed unfit for the conduct of the state. She is shine, O my son;
and, if this my land please thee and thou be willing to abide and
make thy home here, I will marry thee to her and give thee my
kingdom and so be at rest." When Princess Budur heard this, she
bowed her head and her forehead sweated for shame, and she said
to herself. "How shall I do, and I a woman? If I refuse and
depart from him, I cannot be safe but that haply send after me
troops to slay me; and if I consent, belike I shall be put to
shame. I have lost my beloved Kamar al-Zaman and know not what is
become of him; nor can I escape from this scrape save by holding
my peace and consenting and abiding here, till Allah bring about
what is to be." So she raised her head and made submission to
King Armanus, saying, "Hearkening and obedience!"; whereat he
rejoiced and bade the herald make proclamation throughout the
Ebony Islands to hold high festival and decorate the houses. Then
he assembled his Chamberlains and Nabobs, and Emirs and Wazirs
and his officers of state and the Kazis of the city; and,
formally abdicating his Sultanate, endowed Budur therewith and
invested her in all the vestments of royalty. The Emirs and
Grandees went in to her and did her homage, nothing doubting but
that she was a young man, and all who looked on her bepissed
their bag-trousers, for the excess of her beauty and loveliness.
Then, after the Lady Budur had been made Sultan and the drums had
been beaten in announcement of the glad event, and she had been
ceremoniously enthroned, King Armanus proceeded to equip his
daughter Hayat al-Nufus for marriage, and in a few days, they
brought the Lady Budur in to her, when they seemed as it were two
moons risen at one time or two suns in conjunction. So they
entered the bridal-chamber and the doors were shut and the
curtains let down upon them, after the attendants had lighted the
wax-candles and spread for them the carpet-bed. When Budur found
herself alone with the Princess Hayat al-Nufus, she called to
mind her beloved Kamar al-Zaman and grief was sore upon her. So
she wept for his absence, and estrangement and she began
repeating,

"O ye who fled and left my heart in pain low li'en, *
     No breath of life if found within this frame of mine:
I have an eye which e'er complains of wake, but lo! *
     Tears occupy it would that wake content these eyne!
After ye marched forth the lover 'bode behind; *
     Question of him what pains your absence could design!
But for the foods of tears mine eyelids rail and rain, *
     My fires would flame on high and every land calcine.
To Allah make I moan of loved ones lost for aye, *
     Who for my pine and pain no more shall pain and pine:
I never wronged them save that over love I nurst: *
     But Love departs us lovers into blest and curst."

And when she had finished her repeating, the Lady Budur sat down
beside the Princess Hayat al-Nufus and kissed her on the mouth;
after which rising abruptly, she made the minor ablution and
betook herself to her devotions; nor did she leave praying till
Hayat al-Nufus fell asleep, when she slips into bed and lay with
her back to her till morning. And when day had broke the King and
Queen came in to their daughter and asked her how she did.
whereupon she told them what she had seen, and repeated to them
the verses she had heard. Thus far concerning Hayat al-Nufus and
her father; but as regards Queen Budur she went forth and seated
herself upon the royal throne and all the Emirs and Captains and
Officers of state came up to her and wished her joy of the
kingship, kissing the earth before her and calling down blessings
upon her. And she accosted them with smiling face and clad them
in robes of honour, augmenting the fiefs of the high officials
and giving largesse to the levies; wherefore all the people loved
her and offered up prayers for the long endurance of her reign,
doubting not but that she was a man. And she ceased not sitting
all day in the hall of audience, bidding and forbidding;
dispensing justice, releasing prisoners and remitting the
customs-dues, till nightfall, when she withdrew to the apartment
prepared for her. Here she found Hayat al-Nufus seated, so she
sat down by her side and, clapping her on the back, coaxed and
caressed her and kissed her between the eyes, and fell to
versifying in these couplets,

"What secret kept I these my tears have told, *
     And my waste body must my love unfold:
Though hid my pine, my plight on parting day *
     To every envious eye my secret sold:
O ye who broke up camp, you've left behind *
     My spirit wearied and my heart a-cold:
In my hearts core ye dwell, and now these eyne *
     Roll blood-drops with the tears they whilome rolled:
The absent will I ransom with my soul; *
     All can my yearning for their sight behold:
I have an eye whose babe, [FN#314] for love of thee, *
     Rejected sleep nor hath its tears controlled.
The foeman bids me patient bear his loss, *
     Ne'er may mine ears accept the ruth he doled!
I tricks their deme of me, and won my wish *
     Of Kamar al-Zaman's joys manifold:
He joins all perfect gifts like none before, *
     Boasted such might and main no King of old:
Seeing his gifts, Bin Za'idah's [FN#315] largesse *
     Forget we, and Mu'awiyah mildest-soul'd: [FN#316]
Were verse not feeble and o'er short the time *
     I had in laud of him used all of rhyme."

Then Queen Budur stood up and wiped away her tears and, making
the lesser ablution, [FN#317] applied her to pray: nor did she
give over praying till drowsiness overcame the Lady Hayat al-
Nufus and she slept, whereupon the Lady Budur came and lay by her
till the morning. At daybreak, she arose and prayed the dawn-
prayer; and presently seated herself on the royal throne and
passed the day in ordering and counter ordering and giving laws
and administering justice. This is how it fared with her; but as
regards King Armanus he went in to his daughter and asked her how
she did; so she told him all that had befallen her and repeated
to him the verses which Queen Budur had recited, adding, "O my
father, never saw I one more abounding in sound sense and modesty
than my husband, save that he cloth nothing but weep and sigh."
He answered, "O my daughter, have patience with him yet this
third night, and if he go not in unto thee and do away thy
maidenhead, we shall know how to proceed with him and oust him
from the throne and banish him the country." And on this wise he
agreed with his daughter what course he would take.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

          When it was the Two Hundred and Tenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King
Armanus had agreed with his daughter on this wise and had
determined what course he would take and night came on, Queen
Budur arose from the throne of her kingdom and betaking herself
to the palace, entered the apartment prepared for her. There she
found the wax-candles lighted and the Princess Hayat al-Nufus
seated and awaiting her; whereupon she bethought her of her
husband and what had betided them both of sorrow and severance in
so short a space; she wept and sighed and groaned groan upon
groan, and began improvising these couplets,

"News of my love fill all the land, I swear, *
     As suns on Ghaza [FN#318]-wold rain heat and glare:
Speaketh his geste but hard its sense to say; *
     Thus never cease to grow my cark and care:
I hate fair Patience since I loved thee; *
     E'er sawest lover hate for love to bear?
A glance that dealt love-sickness dealt me death, *
     Glances are deadliest things with torments rare:
He shook his love locks down and bared his chin, *
     Whereby I spied his beauties dark and fair:
My care, my cure are in his hands; and he *
     Who caused their dolour can their dole repair:
His belt went daft for softness of his waist; *
     His hips, for envy, to uprise forbear:
His brow curl-diademed is murky night; *
     Unveil 't and lo! bright Morn shows brightest light."

When she had finished her versifying, she would have risen to
pray, but, lo and behold! Hayat al-Nufus caught her by the skirt
and clung to her saying, "O my lord, art thou not ashamed before
my father, after all his favour, to neglect me at such a time as
this?" When Queen Budur heard her words, she sat down in the same
place and said, "O my beloved, what is this thou sayest?" She
replied, "What I say is that I never saw any so proud of himself
as thou. Is every fair one so disdainful? I say not this to
incline thee to me; I say it only of my fear for thee from King
Armanus; because he purposeth, unless thou go in unto me this
very night, and do away my maidenhead, to strip thee of the
kingship on the morrow and banish thee his kingdom; and
peradventure his excessive anger may lead him to slay thee. But
I, O my lord, have ruth on thee and give thee fair warning; and
it is thy right to reck." [FN#319] Now when Queen Budur heard her
speak these words, she bowed her head ground-wards awhile in sore
perplexity and said in herself, "If I refuse I'm lost; and if I
obey I'm shamed. But I am now Queen of all the Ebony Islands and
they are under my rule, nor shall I ever again meet my Kamar al-
Zaman save in this place; for there is no way for him to his
native land but through the Ebony Islands. Verily, I know not
what to do in my present case, but I commit my care to Allah who
directeth all for the best, for I am no man that I should arise
and open this virgin girl." Then quoth Queen Budur to Hayat al-
Nufus, "O my beloved, that I have neglected thee and abstained
from thee is in my own despite." And she told her her whole story
from beginning to end and showed her person to her, saying, "I
conjure thee by Allah to keep my counsel, for I have concealed my
case only that Allah may reunite me with my beloved Kamar al-
Zaman and then come what may."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn
of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Two Hundred and Eleventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
Lady Budur acquainted Hayat al-Nufus with her history and bade
her keep it secret, the Princess heard her with extreme
wonderment and was moved to pity and prayed Allah to reunite her
with her beloved, saying, "Fear nothing, O my sister; but have
patience till Allah bring to pass that which must come to pass:"
and she began repeating,

"None but the men of worth a secret keep;
With worthy men a secret's hidden deep;
As in a room, so secrets lie with me,
Whose door is sealed, lock shot and lost the key." [FN#320]

And when Hayat al-Nufus had ended her verses, she said, "O my
sister, verily the breasts of the noble and brave are of secrets
the grave; and I will not discover shine." Then they toyed and
embraced and kissed and slept till near the Mu'ezzin's call to
dawn prayer, when Hayat al-Nufus arose and took a
pigeon-poult, [FN#321] and cut its throat over her smock and
besmeared herself with its blood. Then she pulled off her
petticoat-trousers and cried aloud, where-upon her people
hastened to her and raised the usual lullilooing and outcries of
joy and gladness. Presently her mother came in to her and asked
her how she did and busied herself about her and abode with her
till evening; whilst the Lady Budur arose with the dawn, and
repaired to the bath and, after washing herself pure, proceeded
to the hall of audience, where she sat down on her throne and
dispensed justice among the folk. Now when King Armanus heard the
loud cries of joy, he asked what was the matter and was informed
of the consummation of his daughter's marriage; whereat he
rejoiced and his breast swelled with gladness and he made a great
marriage-feast whereof the merry-making lasted a long time. Such
was their case: but as regards King Shahriman it was on this
wise. After his son had fared forth to the chase accompanied by
Marzawan, as before related, he tarried patiently awaiting their
return at nightfall; but when his son did not appear he passed a
sleepless night and the dark hours were longsome upon him; his
restlessness was excessive, his excitement grew upon him and he
thought the morning would never dawn. Anc when day broke he sat
expecting his son and waited till noon, but he came not; whereat
his heart forebode separation and was fired with fears for Kamar
al-Zaman; and he cried, "Alas! my son!" and he wept till his
clothes were drenched with tears, and repeated with a beating
heart,

"Love's votaries I ceased not to oppose, *
     Till doomed to taste Love's bitter and Love's sweet:
I drained his rigour-cup to very dregs, *
     Self humbled at its slaves' and freemen's feet:
Fortune had sworn to part the loves of us; *
     She kept her word how truly, well I weet!"

And when he ended his verse, he wiped away his tears and bade his
troops make ready for a march and prepare for a long expedition.
So they all mounted and set forth, headed by the Sultan, whose
heart burnt with grief and was fired with anxiety for his son
Kamar al-Zaman; and they advanced by forced marches. Now the King
divided his host into six divisions, a right wing and a left
wing, a vanguard and a rear guard; [FN#322] and bade them
rendezvous for the morrow at the cross-roads. Accordingly they
separated and scoured the country all the rest of that day till
night, and they marched through the night and at noon of the
ensuing day they joined company at the place where four roads
met. But they knew not which the Prince followed, till they saw
the sign of torn clothes and sighted shreds of flesh and beheld
blood still sprinkled by the way and they noted every piece of
the clothes and fragment of mangled flesh scattered on all sides.
Now when King Shahriman saw this, he cried from his heart-core a
loud cry, saying, "Alas, my son!"; and buffeted his face and
plucks his beard and rent his raiment, doubting not but his son
was dead. Then he gave himself up to excessive weeping and
wailing, and the troops also wept for his weeping, all being
assured that Prince Kamar al-Zaman had perished. They threw dust
on their heads, and the night surprised them shedding tears and
lamenting till they were like to die. Then the King with a heart
on fire and with burning sighs spake these couplets,

"Chide not the mourner for bemourning woe; *
     Enough is yearning every Ill to show:
He weeps for stress of sorrow and of pain, *
     And these to thee best evidence his lowe:
Happy! [FN#323] of whom Love sickness swore that ne'er *
     Should cease his eye lids loving tears to flow:
He mourns the loss of fairest, fullest Moon, *
     Shining o'er all his peers in glorious glow:
But death made drink a brimming cup, what day *
     He fared from natal country fain to go:
His home left he and went from us to grief; *
     Nor to his brethren could he say adieu:
Yea, his loss wounded me with parting pangs, *
     And separation cost me many a throe:
He fared farewelling, as he fared, our eyes; *
     Whenas his Lord vouch-safed him Paradise."

And when King Shahriman had ended his verses, he returned with
the troops to his capital,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.

         When it was the Two Hundred and Twelfth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King
Shahriman had ended his verses, he returned with the troops to
his capital, giving up his son for lost, and deeming that wild
beasts or banditti had set upon him and torn him to pieces; and
made proclamation that all in the Khalidan Islands should don
black in mourning for him. Moreover, he built, in his memory, a
pavilion, naming it House of Lamentations; and on Mondays and
Thursdays he devoted himself to the business of the state and
ordering the affairs of his levies and lieges; and the rest of
the week he was wont to spend in the House of Lamentations,
mourning for his son and bewailing him with elegiac
verses, [FN#324] of which the following are some:--

"My day of bliss is that when thou appearest; *
     My day of bale [FN#325] is that whereon thou farest:
Though through the night I quake in dread of death; *
     Union wi' thee is of all bliss the dearest."

And again he said,

"My soul be sacrifice for one, whose going *
     Afflicted hearts with sufferings sore and dread:
Let joy her widowed term [FN#326] fulfil, for I *
     Divorced joy with the divorce thrice-said." [FN#327]

Such was the case with King Shahriman; but as regards Queen Budur
daughter of King Ghayur, she abode as ruler in the Ebony Islands,
whilst the folk would point to her with their fingers, and say,
"Yonder is the son-in-law of King Armanus." And every night she
lay with Hayat al-Nufus, to whom she lamented her desolate state
and longing for her husband Kamar al-Zaman; weeping and
describing to her his beauty and loveliness, and yearning to
enjoy him though but in a dream: And at times she would repeat,

"Well Allah wots that since my severance from thee, *
     I wept till forced to borrow tears at usury:
'Patience!' my blamer cried, 'Heartsease right soon shalt see!' *
     Quoth I, 'Say, blamer, where may home of Patience be?'"

This is how it fared with Queen Budur; but as regards Kamar al-
Zaman, he abode with the gardener in the garden for no short
time, weeping night and day and repeating verses bewailing the
past time of enjoyment and delight; whilst the gardener kept
comforting him and assuring him that the ship would set sail for
the land of the Moslems at the end of the year. And in this
condition he continued till one day he saw the folk crowding
together and wondered at this; but the gardener came in to him
and said, "O my son, give over work for this day nor lead water
to the trees; for it is a festival day, whereon folk visit one
another. So take thy rest and only keep shine eye on the garden,
whilst I go look after the ship for thee; for yet but a little
while and I send thee to the land of the Moslems." Upon this, he
went forth from the garden leaving to himself Kamar al-Zaman, who
fell to musing upon his case till his heart was like to break and
the tears streamed from his eyes. So he wept with excessive
weeping till he swooned away and, when he recovered, he rose and
walked about the garden, pondering what Time had done with him
and bewailing the long endurance of his estrangement and
separation from those he loved. As he was thus absorbed in
melancholy thought, his foot stumbled and he fell on his face,
his forehead striking against the projecting root of a tree; and
the blow cut it open and his blood ran down and mingled with his
tears Then he rose and, wiping away the blood, dried his tears
and bound his brow with a piece of rag; then continued his walk
about the garden engrossed by sad reverie. Presently, he looked
up at a tree and saw two birds quarrelling thereon, and one of
them rose up and smote the other with its beak on the neck and
severed from its body its head, wherewith it flew away, whilst
the slain bird fell to the ground before Kamar al-Zaman. As it
lay, behold, two great birds swooped down upon it alighting, one
at the head and the other at the tail, and both drooped their
wings and bowed their bills over it and, extending their necks
towards it, wept. Kamar al-Zaman also wept when seeing the birds
thus bewail their mate, and called to mind his wife and father,
And Shahrazed perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

       When it was the Two Hundred and Thirteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kamar al-
Zaman wept and lamented his separation from spouse and sire, when
he beheld those two birds weeping over their mate. Then he looked
at the twain and saw them dig a grave and therein bury the slain
bird; after which they flew away far into the firmament and
disappeared for a while; but presently they returned with the
murtherer-bird and, alighting on the grave of the murthered,
stamped on the slayer till they had done him to death. Then they
rent his belly and tearing out his entrails, poured the blood on
the grave of the slain [FN#328]: moreover, they stripped off his
skin and tare his flesh in pieces and, pulling out the rest of
the bowels, scattered them hither and thither. All this while
Kamar al-Zaman was watching them wonderingly; but presently,
chancing to look at the place where the two birds had slain the
third, he saw therein something gleaming. So he drew near to it
and noted that it was the crop of the dead bird. Whereupon he
took it and opened it and found the talisman which had been the
cause of his separation from his wife. But when he saw it and
knew it, he fell to the ground a-fainting for joy; and, when he
revived, he said, "Praised be Allah! This is a foretaste of good
and a presage of reunion with my beloved." Then he examined the
jewel and passed it over his eyes [FN#329]; after which he bound
it to his forearm, rejoicing in coming weal, and walked about
till nightfall awaiting the gardener's return; and when he came
not, he lay down and slept in his wonted place. At daybreak he
rose to his work and, girding his middle with a cord of palm-
fibre, took hatchet and basket and walked down the length of the
garden, till he came to a carob-tree and struck the axe into its
roots. The blow rang and resounded; so he cleared away the soil
from the place and discovered a trap-door and raised it.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

       When It was the Two Hundred and Fourteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Kamar
al-Zaman raised the trap-door, he found a winding stair, which he
descended and came to an ancient vault of the time of Ad and
Thamud, [FN#330] hewn out of the rock. Round the vault stood many
brazen vessels of the bigness of a great oil-jar which he found
full of gleaming red gold: whereupon he said to himself, "Verily
sorrow is gone and solace is come!" Then he mounted from the
souterrain to the garden and, replacing the trap-door as it was
before, busied himself in conducting water to the trees till the
last of the day, when the gardener came back and said to him, "O
my son, rejoice at the good tidings of a speedy return to thy
native land: the merchants are ready equipped for the voyage and
the ship in three days' time will set sail for the City of Ebony,
which is the first of the cities of the Moslems, and after making
it, thou must travel by land a six months' march till thou come
to the Islands of Khalidan, the dominions of King Shahriman." At
this Kamar al-Zaman rejoiced and began repeating,

"Part not from one whose wont is not to part from you; *
     Nor with your cruel taunts an innocent mortify:
Another so long parted had ta'en heart from you, *
     And had his whole condition changed,--but not so I."

Then he kissed the gardener's hand and said, "O my father, even
as thou hast brought me glad tidings, so I also have great good
news for thee,' and told him anent his discovery of the vault;
whereat the gardener rejoiced and said, "O my son, fourscore
years have I dwelt in this garden and have never hit on aught
whilst thou, who hast not sojourned with me a year, hast
discovered this thing; wherefore it is Heaven's gift to thee,
which shall end thy crosses and aid thee to rejoin thy folk and
foregather with her thou lovest." Quoth Kamar al-Zaman, "There is
no help but it must be shared between me and thee." Then he
carried him to the underground-chamber and showed him the gold,
which was in twenty jars: he took ten and the gardener ten, and
the old man said to him, "O my son, fill thyself leather
bottles [FN#331] with the sparrow-olives [FN#332] which grow in
this garden, for they are not found except in our land; and the
merchants carry them to all parts. Lay the gold in the bottles
and strew it over with olives: then stop them and cover them and
take them with thee in the ship." So Kamar al-Zaman arose without
stay or delay and took fifty leather bottles and stored in each
somewhat of the gold, and closed each one after placing a layer
of olives over the gold; and at the bottom of one of the bottles
he laid the talisman. Then sat he down to talk with the gardener,
confident of speedy reunion with his own people and saying to
himself, "When I come to the Ebony Islands I will journey thence
to my father's country and enquire for my beloved Budur. Would to
Heaven I knew whether she returned to her own land or journeyed
on to my father's country or whether there befel her any accident
by the way." And he began versifying,

"Love in my breast they lit and fared away, *
     And far the land wherein my love is pent:
Far lies the camp and those who camp therein; *
     Par is her tent-shrine, where I ne'er shall tent.
Patience far deaf me when from me they fled; *
     Sleep failed mine eyes, endurance was forspent:
They left and with them left my every joy, *
     Wending with them, nor find I peace that went:
They made these eyes roll down love tears in flood, *
     And lacking them these eyne with tears are drent.
When my taste spins once again would see them, *
     When pine and expectation but augment,
In my heart's core their counterfeits I trace, *
     With love and yearning to behold their grace."

Then, while he awaited the end of the term of days, he told the
gardener the tale of the birds and what had passed between them;
whereat the hearer wondered; and they both lay down and slept
till the morning. The gardener awoke sick and abode thus two
days; but on the third day, his sickness increased on him, till
they despaired of his life and Kamar al-Zaman grieved with sore
grief for him. Meanwhile behold, the Master and his crew came and
enquired for the gardener; and, when Kamar al-Zaman told them
that he was sick, they asked, "Where be the youth who is minded
to go with us to the Ebony Islands?" "He is your servent and he
standeth before you!" answered the Prince and bade them carry the
bottles of olives to the ship; so they transported them, saying,
"Make haste, thou, for the wind is fair;" and he replied, "I hear
and obey." Then he carried his provaunt on board and, returning
to bid the gardener farewell, found him in the agonies of death;
so he sat down at his head and closed his eyes, and his soul
departed his body; whereupon he laid him out and committed him to
the earth unto the mercy of Allah Almighty. Then he made for the
ship but found that she had already weighed anchor and set sail;
nor did she cease to cleave the seas till she disappeared from
his sight. So he went back to whence he came heavy-hearted with
whirling head; and neither would he address a soul nor return a
reply; and reaching the garden and sitting down in cark and care
he threw dust on his head and buffeted his cheeks.--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

        When it was the Two Hundred and Fifteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
ship sped on her course, Kamar al-Zaman returned to the garden in
cark and care; but- anon he rented the place of its owner and
hired a man to help him in irrigating the trees. Moreover, he
repaired the trap-door and he went to the underground chamber and
bringing the rest of the gold to grass, stowed it in other fifty
bottles which he filled up with a layer of olives. Then he
enquired of the ship and they told him that it sailed but once a
year, at which his trouble of mind redoubled and he cried sore
for that which had betided him, above all for the loss of the
Princess Budur's talisman, and spent his nights and days weeping
and repealing verses. Such was his case; but as regards the ship
she sailed with a favouring wind till she reached the Ebony
Islands. Now by decree of destiny, Queen Budur was sitting at a
lattice-window overlooking the sea and saw the galley cast anchor
upon the strand. At this sight, her heart throbbed and she took
horse with the Chamberlains and Nabobs and, riding down to the
shore, halted by the ship, whilst the sailors broke bulk and bore
the bales to the storehouses; after which she called the captain
to her presence and asked what he had with him. He answered "O
King, I have with me in this ship aromatic drugs and cosmetics
and healing powders and ointments and plasters and precious
metals and rich stuffs and rugs of Yemen leather, not to be borne
of mule or camel, and all manner of otters and spices and
perfumes, civet and ambergris and camphor and Sumatra aloes-wood,
and tamerinds [FN#333] and sparrow-olives to boot, such as are
rare to find in this country." When she heard talk of sparrow-
olives her heart longed for them and she said to the ship-master,
"How much of olives hast thou?" He replied, "Fifty bottles full,
but their owner is not with us, so the King shall take what he
will of them." Quoth she, "Bring them ashore, that I may see
them.'' Thereupon he called to the sailors, who brought her the
fifty bottles; and she opened one and, looking at the olives,
said to the captain, "I will take the whole fifty and pay you
their value, whatso it be." He answered, "By Allah, O my lord,
they have no value in our country; moreover their shipper tarried
behind us, and he is a poor man." Asked she, "And what are they
worth here?" and he answered "A thousand dirhams." "I will take
them at a thousand," she said and bade them carry the fifty
bottles to the palace. When it was night, she called for a bottle
of olives and opened it, there being none in the room but herself
and the Princess Hayat al-Nufus. Then, placing a dish before her
she turned into it the contents of the jar, when there fell out
into the dish with the olives a heap of red gold; and she said to
the Lady Hayat al-Nufus, "This is naught but gold!" So she sent
for the rest of the bottles and found them all full of precious
metal and scarce enough olives to fill a single jar. Moreover,
she sought among the gold and found therein the talisman, which
she took and examined and behold, it was that which Kamar al-
Zaman had taken from off the band of her petticoat trousers.
Thereupon she cried out for joy and slipped down in a swoon;--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

        When it was the Two Hundred and Sixteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King
Budur saw the talisman she cried out for joy and slipped down in
a swoon; and when she recovered she said to herself, "Verily,
this talisman was the cause of my separation from my beloved
Kamar al-Zaman; but now it is an omen of good." Then she showed
it to Hayat al-Nufus and said to her, "This was the cause of
disunion and now, please Allah, it shall be the cause of
reunion." As soon as day dawned she seated herself on the royal
throne and sent for the ship-master, who came into the presence
and kissed the ground before her. Quoth she, "Where didst thou
leave the owner of these olives?" Quoth he, "O King of the age,
we left him in the land of the Magians and he is a gardener
there." She rejoined, "Except thou bring him to me, thou knowest
not the harm which awaiteth thee and thy ship." Then she bade
them seal up the magazines of the merchants and said to them,
"Verily the owner of these olives hath borrowed of me and I have
a claim upon him for debt and, unless ye bring him to me, I will
without fail do you all die and seize your goods." So they went
to the captain and promised him the hire of the ship, if he would
go and return a second time, saying, "Deliver us from this
masterful tyrant." Accordingly the skipper embarked and set sail
and Allah decreed him a prosperous voyage, till he came to the
Island of the Magians and, landing by night, went up to the
garden. Now the night was long upon Kamar al-Zaman, and he sat,
bethinking him of his beloved, and bewailing what had befallen
him and versifying,

"A night whose stars refused to run their course, *
     A night of those which never seem outworn:
Like Resurrection-day, of longsome length [FN#334] *
     To him that watched and waited for the morn."

Now at this moment, the captain knocked at the garden-gate, and
Kamar al-Zaman opened and went out to him, whereupon the crew
seized him and went down with him on board the ship and set sail
forthright; and they ceased not voyaging days and nights, whilst
Kamar al-Zaman knew not why they dealt thus with him; but when he
questioned them they replied, "Thou hast offended against the
Lord of the Ebony Islands, the son-in-law of King Armanus, and
thou hast stolen his monies, miserable that thou art!" Said he,
"By Allah! I never entered that country nor do I know where it
is!" However, they fared on with him, till they made the Ebony
Islands and landing, carried him up to the Lady Budur, who knew
him at sight and said, "Leave him with the eunuchs, that they may
take him to the bath." Then she relieved the merchants of the
embargo and gave the captain a robe of honour worth ten thousand
pieces of gold; and, after returning to the palace, she went in
that night to the Princess Hayat al-Nufus and told her what had
passed, saying, "Keep thou my counsel, till I accomplish my
purpose, and do a deed which shall be recorded and shall be read
by Kings and commoners after we be dead and gone." And when she
gave orders that they bear Kamar al-Zaman to the bath, they did
so and clad him in a royal habit so that, when he came forth, he
resembled a willow-bough or a star which shamed the greater and
lesser light [FN#335] and its glow, and his life and soul returned
to his frame. Then he repaired to the palace and went in to the
Princess Budur; and when she saw him she schooled her heart to
patience, till she should have accomplished her purpose; and she
bestowed on him Mamelukes and eunuchs, camels and mules.
Moreover, she gave him a treasury of money and she ceased not
advancing him from dignity to dignity, till she made him Lord
High Treasurer and committed to his charge all the treasures of
the state; and she admitted him to familiar favour and acquainted
the Emirs with his rank and dignity. And all loved him, for Queen
Budur did not cease day by day to increase his allowances. As for
Kamar al-Zaman, he was at a loss anent the reason of her thus
honouring him; and he gave gifts and largesse out of the
abundance of the wealth; and he devoted himself to the service of
King Armanus; so that the King and all the Emirs and people,
great and small, adored him and were wont to swear by his life.
Nevertheless, he ever marvelled at the honour and favour shown
him by Queen Budur and said to himself, "By Allah, there needs
must be a reason for this affection! Peradventure, this King
favoureth me not with these immoderate favours save for some ill
purpose and, therefore, there is no help but that I crave leave
of him to depart his realm." So he went in to Queen Budur and
said to her, "O King, thou hast overwhelmed me with favours, but
it will fulfil the measure of thy bounties if thou take from me
all thou hast been pleased to bestow upon me, and permit me to
depart." She smiled and asked, "What maketh thee seek to depart
and plunge into new perils, whenas thou art in the enjoyment of
the highest favour and greatest prosperity?" Answered Kamar al-
Zaman, "O King, verily this favour, if there be no reason for it,
is indeed a wonder of wonders, more by token that thou hast
advanced me to dignities such as befit men of age and experience,
albeit I am as it were a young child." And Queen Budur rejoined,
"The reason is that I love thee for shine exceeding loveliness
and thy surpassing beauty; and if thou wilt but grant me my
desire of thy body, I will advance thee yet farther in honour and
favour and largesse; and I will make thee Wazir, for all thy
tender age even as the folk made me Sultan over them and I no
older than thou; so that nowadays there is nothing strange when
children take the head and by Allah, he was a gifted man who
said,

'It seems as though of Lot's tribe were our days, *
     And crave with love to advance the young in years.'" [FN#336]

When Kamar al-Zaman heard these words, he was abashed and his
cheeks flushed till they seemed a-flame; and he said, "I need not
these favours which lead to the commission of sin; I will live
poor in wealth but wealthy in virtue and honour." Quoth she, "I
am not to be duped by thy scruples, arising from prudery and
coquettish ways; and Allah bless him who saith,

'To him I spake of coupling, but he said to me, *
     How long this noyous long persistency?'
But when gold piece I showed him, he cried, *
     'Who from the Almighty Sovereign e'er shall flee?'"

Now when Kamar al-Zaman, heard these words and understood her
verses and their import, he said, "O King, I have not the habit
of these doings, nor have I strength to bear these heavy burthens
for which elder than I have proved unable; then how will it be
with my tender age?" But she smiled at his speech and retorted,
"Indeed, it is a matter right marvellous how error springeth from
the disorder of man's intendiment!! Since thou art a boy, why
standest thou in fear of sin or the doing of things forbidden,
seeing that thou art not yet come to years of canonical
responsibility; and the offences of a child incur neither
punishment nor reproof? Verily, thou hast committed thyself to a
quibble for the sake of contention, and it is thy duty to bow
before a proposal of fruition, so henceforward cease from denial
and coyness, for the commandment of Allah is a decree
foreordained: [FN#337] indeed, I have more reason than thou to
fear falling and by sin to be misled; and well inspired was he
who said,

'My prickle is big and the little one said, *
     'Thrust boldly in vitals with lion-like stroke!
Then I, ' 'Tis a sin!; and he, 'No sin to me! *
     So I had him at once with a counterfeit poke." [FN#338]

When Kamar al-Zaman heard these words, the light became darkness
in his sight and he said, "O King, thou hast in thy household
fair women and female slaves, who have not their like in this
age: shall not these suffice thee without me? Do thy will with
them and let me go!" She replied, "Thou sayest sooth, but it is
not with them that one who loveth thee can heal himself of
torment and can abate his fever; for, when tastes and
inclinations are corrupted by vice, they hear and obey other than
good advice. So leave arguing and listen to what the poet saith,

'Seest not the bazar with its fruit in rows? *
     These men are for figs and for sycamore [FN#339] those!'

And what another saith,

'Many whose anklet rings are dumb have tinkling belts, *
     And this hath all content while that for want must wail:
Thou bidd'st me be a fool and quit thee for her charms; *
     Allah forfend I leave The Faith, turn Infidel!
Nay, by thy rights of side-beard mocking all her curls, *
     Nor mott nor maid [FN#340] from thee my heart shall spell.'

And yet another,

'O beauty's Union! love for thee's my creed, *
     Free choice of Faith and eke my best desire:
Women I have forsworn for thee; so may *
     Deem me all men this day a shaveling friar.' [FN#341]

And yet another,

'Even not beardless one with girl, nor heed *
     The spy who saith to thee ''Tis an amiss!'
Far different is the girl whose feet one kisses *
     And that gazelle whose feet the earth must kiss.'

And yet another,

'A boy of twice ten is fit for a King!'

And yet another,

'The penis smooth and round was made with anus best to match
     it, * Had it been made for cunnus' sake it had been formed
     like hatchet!'

And yet another said,

'My soul thy sacrifice! I chose thee out *
     Who art not menstruous nor oviparous:
 Did I with woman mell, I should beget *
     Brats till the wide wide world grew strait for us.'

And yet another,

'She saith (sore hurt in sense the most acute *
     For she had proffered what did not besuit),
'Unless thou stroke as man should swive his wife *
     Blame not when horns thy brow shall incornute!
Thy wand seems waxen, to a limpo grown, *
     And more I palm it, softer grows the brute!'

And yet another,

'Quoth she (for I to lie with her forbore), *
     'O folly-following fool, O fool to core:
If thou my coynte for Kiblah [FN#342] to thy coigne *
     Reject, we'll shall please thee more.' [FN#343]

And yet another,

'She proffered me a tender coynte *
     Quoth I 'I will not roger thee!'
She drew back, saying, 'From the Faith *
     He turns, who's turned by Heaven's decree! [FN#344]
And front wise fluttering, in one day, *
     Is obsolete persistency!'
Then swung she round and shining rump *
     Like silvern lump she showed me!
I cried: 'Well done, O mistress mine! *
     No more am I in pain for thee;
O thou of all that Allah oped [FN#345] *
     Showest me fairest victory!'

And yet another,

'Men craving pardon will uplift their hands; *
     Women pray pardon with their legs on high:
Out on it for a pious, prayerful work! *
     The Lord shall raise it in the depths to lie.'" [FN#346]

When Kamar al-Zaman heard her quote this poetry, and was
certified that there was no escaping compliance with what willed
she, he said, "O King of the age, if thou must needs have it so,
make covenant with me that thou wilt do this thing with me but
once, though it avail not to correct thy depraved appetite, and
that thou wilt never again require this thing of me to the end of
time; so perchance shall Allah purge me of the sin." She replied
"I promise thee this thing, hoping that Allah of His favour will
relent towards us and blot out our mortal offence; for the girdle
of heaven's forgiveness is not indeed so strait, but it may
compass us around and absolve us of the excess of our heinous
sins and bring us to the light of salvation out of the darkness
of error; and indeed excellently well saith the poet,

'Of evil thing the folk suspect us twain; *
     And to this thought their hearts and souls are bent:
Come, dear! let's justify and free their souls *
     That wrong us; one good bout and then--repent!''' [FN#347]

Thereupon she made him an agreement and a covenant and swore a
solemn oath by Him who is Self-existent, that this thing should
befal betwixt them but once and never again for all time, and
that the desire of him was driving her to death and perdition. So
he rose up with her, on this condition, and went with her to her
own boudoir, that she might quench the lowe of her lust, saying,
"There is no Majesty, and there is no Might save in Allah, the
Glorious, the Great! This is the fated decree of the All-
powerful, the All-wise!"; and he doffed his bag-trousers,
shamefull and abashed, with the tears running from his eyes for
stress of affright. Thereat she smiled and making him mount upon
a couch with her, said to him, "After this night, thou shalt see
naught that will offend thee." Then she turned to him bussing and
bosoming him and bending calf over calf, and said to him, "Put
thy hand between my thighs to the accustomed place; so haply it
may stand up to prayer after prostration." He wept and cried, "I
am not good at aught of this," but she said, "By my life, an thou
do as I bid thee, it shall profit thee!" So he put out his hand,
with vitals a-fire for confusion, and found her thighs cooler
than cream and softer than silk. The touching of them pleasured
him and he moved his hand hither and thither, till it came to a
dome abounding in good gifts and movements and shifts, and said
in himself, "Perhaps this King is a hermaphrodite, [FN#348]
neither man nor woman quite;" so he said to her, "O King, I
cannot find that thou hast a tool like the tools of men; what
then moved thee to do this deed?" Then loudly laughed Queen Budur
till she fell on her back, [FN#349] and said, "O my dearling, how
quickly thou hast forgotten the nights we have lain together!"
Then she made herself known to him, and he knew her for his wife,
the Lady Budur, daughter of King al-Ghayur, Lord of the Isles and
the Seas. So he embraced her and she embraced him, and he kissed
her and she kissed him; then they lay down on the bed of pleasure
voluptuous, repeating the words of the poet,

"When his softly bending shape bid him close to my embrace *
     Which clips him all about like the tendrils of the vine
And shed a flood of softness on the hardness of his heart, *
     He yielded though at first he was minded to decline;
And dreading lest the railer's eye should light upon his form, *
     Came armoured with caution to baffle his design:
His waist makes moan of hinder cheeks that weigh upon his feet *
     Like heavy load of merchandise upon young camel li'en;
Girt with his glances scymitar which seemed athirst for blood, *
     And clad in mail of dusky curls that show the sheeniest
     shine,
His fragrance wafted happy news of footstep coming nigh, *
     And to him like a bird uncaged I flew in straightest line:
I spread my cheek upon his path, beneath his sandal-shoon, *
     And lo! the stibium [FN#350] of their dust healed all my hurt
     of eyne.
With one embrace again I bound the banner of our loves [FN#351] *
     And loosed the knot of my delight that bound in bonds
     malign:
Then bade I make high festival, and straight came flocking in *
     Pure joys that know not grizzled age [FN#352] nor aught of
     pain and pine:
The full moon dotted with the stars the lips and pearly teeth *
     That dance right joyously upon the bubbling face of wine:
So in the prayer-niche of their joys I yielded me to what *
     Would make the humblest penitent of sinner most indign.
I swear by all the signs [FN#353] of those glories in his face *
     I'll ne'er forget the Chapter entituled Al-Ikhlas." [FN#354]

Then Queen Budur told Kamar al-Zaman all that had befallen her
from beginning to end and he did likewise; after which he began
to upbraid her, saying, "What moved thee to deal with me as thou
hast done this night?" She replied, "Pardon me! for I did this by
way of jest, and that pleasure and gladness might be increased."
And when dawned the morn and day arose with its sheen and shone,
she sent to King Armanus, sire of the Lady Hayat al-Nufus, and
acquainted him with the truth of the case and that she was wife
to Kamar al-Zaman. Moreover, she told him their tale and the
cause of their separation, and how his daughter was a virgin,
pure as when she was born. He marvelled at their story with
exceeding marvel and bade them chronicle it in letters of gold.
Then he turned to Kamar al-Zaman and said, "O King's son, art
thou minded to become my son-in-law by marrying my daughter?"
Replied he, "I must consult the Queen Budur, as she hath a claim
upon me for benefits without stint." And when he took counsel
with her, she said, "Right is thy recking; marry her and I will
be her handmaid; for I am her debtor for kindness and favour and
good offices, and obligations manifold, especially as we are here
in her place and as the King her father hath whelmed us with
benefits." [FN#355] Now when he saw that she inclined to this and
was not jealous of Hayat al-Nufus, he agreed with her upon this
matter.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Two Hundred and Seventeenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Kamar al-
Zaman agreed with his wife, Queen Budur, upon this matter and
told King Armanus what she had said; whereat he rejoiced with
great joy. Then he went out and, seating himself upon his chair
of estate, assembled all the Wazirs, Emirs, Chamberlains and
Grandees, to whom he related the whole story of Kamar al-Zaman
and his wife, Queen Budur, from first to last; and acquainted
them with his desire to marry his daughter Hayat al-Nufus to the
Prince and make him King in the stead of Queen Budur. Whereupon
said they all, "Since he is the husband of Queen Budur, who hath
been our King till now, whilst we deemed her son-in-law to King
Armanus, we are all content to have him to Sultan over us; and we
will be his servants, nor will we swerve from his allegiance." So
Armanus rejoiced hereat and, summoning Kazis and witnesses and
the chief officers of state, bade draw up the contract of
marriage between Kamar al-Zaman and his daughter, the Princess
Hayat al-Nufus. Then he held high festival, giving sumptuous
marriage-feasts and bestowing costly dresses of honour upon all
the Emirs and Captains of the host; moreover he distributed alms
to the poor and needy and set free all the prisoners. The whole
world rejoiced in the coming of Kamar al-Zaman to the throne,
blessing him and wishing him endurance of glory and prosperity,
renown and felicity; and, as soon as he became King, he remitted
the customs-dues and released all men who remained in gaol. Thus
he abode a long while, ordering himself worthily towards his
lieges; and he lived with his two wives in peace, happiness,
constancy and content, lying the night with each of them in turn.
He ceased not after this fashion during many years, for indeed
all his troubles and afflictions were blotted out from him and he
forgot his father King Shahriman and his former estate of honour
and favour with him. After a while Almighty Allah blessed him
with two boy children, as they were two shining moons, through
his two wives; the elder whose name was Prince Amjad, [FN#356] by
Queen Budur, and the younger whose name was Prince As'ad by Queen
Hayat al-Nufus; and this one was comelier than his brother. They
were reared in splendour and tender affection, in respectful
bearing and in the perfection of training; and they were
instructed in penmanship and science and the arts of government
and horsemanship, till they attained the extreme accomplishments
and the utmost limit of beauty and loveliness; both men and women
being ravished by their charms. They grew up side by side till
they reached the age of seventeen, eating and drinking together
and sleeping in one bed, nor ever parting at any time or tide;
wherefore all the people envied them. Now when they came to man's
estate and were endowed with every perfection, their father was
wont, as often as he went on a journey, to make them sit in his
stead by turns in the hall of judgement; and each did justice
among the folk one day at a time. But it came to pass, by
confirmed fate and determined lot, that love for As'ad (son of
Queen Hayat al-Nufus) rose in the heart of Queen Budur, and that
affection for Amjad (son of Queen Budur) rose in the heart of
Queen Hayat al-Nufus. [FN#357] Hence it was that each of the women
used to sport and play with the son of her sister-wife, kissing
him and straining him to her bosom, whilst each mother thought
that the other's behaviour arose but from maternal affection. On
this wise passion got the mastery of the two women's hearts and
they became madly in love with the two youths, so that when the
other's son came in to either of them, she would press him to her
breast and long for him never to be parted from her; till, at
last, when waiting grew longsome to them and they found no path
to enjoyment, they refused meat and drink and banished the solace
of sleep. Presently, the King fared forth to course and chase,
bidding his two sons sit to do justice in his stead, each one day
in turn as was their wont.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.

       When it was the Two Hundred and Eighteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the King
fared forth to sport and hunt, bidding his two sons sit to do
justice in his stead, each one day by turn, as was their wont.
Now Prince Amjad sat in judgement the first day, bidding and
forbidding, appointing and deposing, giving and refusing; and
Queen Hayat al-Nufus, mother of As'ad, wrote to him a letter
suing for his favour and discovering to him her passion and
devotion; altogether put tiny off the mask and giving him to know
that she desired to enjoy him. So she took a scroll and thereon
indited these cadences, "From the love deranged * the sorrowful
and estranged * whose torment is prolonged for the longing of
thee! * Were I to recount to thee the extent of my care * and
what of sadness I bear * the passion which my heart cloth tear *
and all that I endure for weeping and unrest * and the rending of
my sorrowful breast * my unremitting grief * and my woe without
relief * and all my suffering for severance of thee * and sadness
and love's ardency * no letter could contain it; nor calculation
could compass it * Indeed earth and heaven upon me are strait;
and I have no hope and no trust but what from thee I await * Upon
death I am come nigh * and the horrors of dissolution I aby *
Burning upon me is sore * with parting pangs and estrangement
galore * Were I to set forth the yearnings that possess me more
and more * no scrolls would suffice to hold such store * and of
the excess of my pain and pine, I have made the following lines:-
-

Were I to dwell on heart-consuming heat, *
     Unease and transports in my spins meet,
Nothing were left of ink and reeden pen *
     Nor aught of paper; no, not e'en a sheet.

Then Queen Hayat al-Nufus wrapped up her letter in a niece of
costly silk scented with musk and ambergris; and folded it up
with her silken hair-strings [FN#358] whose cost swallowed down
treasures laid it in a handkerchief and gave it to a eunuch
bidding him bear it to Prince Amjad.--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

       When it was the Two Hundred and Nineteenth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that she gave
her missive to the eunuch in waiting and bade him bear it to
Prince Amjad. And that eunuch went forth ignoring what the future
hid for him (for the Omniscient ordereth events even as He
willeth); and, going in to the Prince, kissed the ground between
his hands and handed to him the letter. On receiving the kerchief
he opened it and, reading the epistle and recognizing its gist he
was ware that his father's wife was essentially an adulteress and
a traitress at heart to her husband, King Kamar al-Zaman. So he
waxed wroth with exceeding wrath and railed at women and their
works, saying, "Allah curse women, the traitresses, the imperfect
in reason and religion!" [FN#359] Then he drew his sword and said
to the eunuch, "Out on thee, thou wicked slave! Dost thou carry
messages of disloyalty for thy lord's wife? By Allah, there is no
good in thee, O black of hue and heart, O foul of face and
Nature's forming!" So he smote him on the neck and severed his
head from his body; then, folding the kerchief over its contents
he thrust it into his breast pocket and went in to his own mother
and told her what had passed, reviling and reproaching her, and
saying, "Each one of you is viler than the other; and, by Allah
the Great and Glorious, did I not fear ill-manneredly to
transgress against the rights of my father, Kamar al-Zaman, and
my brother, Prince As'ad, I would assuredly go in to her and cut
off her head, even as I cut off that of her eunuch!" Then he went
forth from his mother in a mighty rage; and when the news reached
Queen Hayat al-Nufus of what he had done with her eunuch, she
abused him [FN#360] and cursed him and plotted perfidy against
him. He passed the night, sick with rage, wrath and concern; nor
found he pleasure in meat, drink or sleep. And when the next
morning dawned Prince As'ad fared forth in his turn to rule the
folk in his father's stead, whilst his mother, Hayat al-Nufus,
awoke in feeble plight because of what she had heard from Prince
Amjad concerning the slaughter of her eunuch. So Prince As'ad sat
in the audience-chamber that day, judging and administering
justice, appointing and deposing, bidding and forbidding, giving
and bestowing. And he ceased not thus till near the time of
afternoon-prayer, when Queen Budur sent for a crafty old woman
and, discovering to her what was in her heart, wrote a letter to
Prince As'ad, complaining of the excess of her affection and
desire for him in these cadenced lines, "From her who perisheth
for passion and love-forlorn * to him who in nature and culture
is goodliest born * to him who is conceited of his own loveliness
* and glories in his amorous grace * who from those that seek to
enjoy him averteth his face * and refuseth to show favour unto
the self abasing and base * him who is cruel and of disdainful
mood * from the lover despairing of good * to Prince As'ad *
     with passing beauty endowed * and of excelling grace proud *
of the face moon bright * and the brow flower-white * and
dazzling splendid light * This is my letter to him whose love
melteth my body * and rendeth my skin and bones! * Know that my
patience faileth me quite * and I am perplexed in my plight *
longing and restlessness weary me * and sleep and patience deny
themselves to me * but mourning and watching stick fast to me *
and desire and passion torment me * and the extremes of languor
and sickness have sheet me * Yet may my life be a ransom for thee
* albeit thy pleasure be to slay her who loveth thee * and Allah
prolong the life of thee * and preserve thee from all infirmity!"
And after these cadences she wrote these couplets,

"Fate hath commanded I become thy fere, *
     O shining like full moon when clearest clear!
All beauty dost embrace, all eloquence; *
     Brighter than aught within our worldly sphere:
Content am I my torturer thou be: *
     Haply shalt alms me with one lovely leer!
Happy her death who dieth for thy love! *
     No good in her who holdeth thee unclear!"

And also the following couplets,

"Unto thee, As'ad! I of passion-pangs complain; *
     Have ruth on slave of love so burnt with flaming pain:
How long, I ask, shall hands of Love disport with me, *
     With longings, dolour, sleepliness and bale and bane?
Anon I 'plain of sea in heart, anon of fire *
     In vitals, O strange case, dear wish, my fairest fain!
O blamer, cease thy blame, and seek thyself to fly *
     From love, which makes these eyne a rill of tears to rain.
How oft I cry for absence and desire, Ah grief! *
     But all my crying naught of gain for me shall gain:
Thy rigours dealt me sickness passing power to bear, *
     Thou art my only leach, assain me an thou deign!
O chider, chide me not in caution, for I doubt *
     That plaguey Love to thee shall also deal a bout."

Then Queen Budur perfumed the letter-paper with a profusion of
odoriferous musk and, winding it in her hairstrings which were of
Iraki silk, with pendants of oblong emeralds, set with pearls and
stones of price, delivered it to the old woman, bidding her carry
it to Prince As'ad. [FN#361] She did so in order to pleasure her,
and going in to the Prince, straightway and without stay, found
him in his own rooms and delivered to him the letter in privacy;
after which she stood waiting an hour or so for the answer. When
As'ad had read the paper and knew its purport, he wrapped it up
again in the ribbons and put it in his bosom-pocket: then (for he
was wrath beyond all measure of wrath) he cursed false women and
sprang up and drawing his sword, smote the old trot on the neck
and cut off her pate. Thereupon he went in to his mother, Queen
Hayat al-Nufus, whom he found lying on her bed in feeble case,
for that which had betided her with Prince Amjad, and railed at
her and cursed her; after which he left her and fore-gathered
with his brother, to whom he related all that had befallen him
with Queen Budur, adding, "By Allah, O my brother, but that I was
ashamed before thee, I had gone in to her forthright and had
smitten her head off her shoulders!" Replied Prince Amjad, "By
Allah, O my brother, yesterday when I was sitting upon the seat
of judgement, the like of what hath befallen thee this day befel
me also with thy mother who sent me a letter of similar purport."
And he told him all that had passed, adding, "By Allah, O my
brother, naught but respect for thee withheld me from going in to
her and dealing with her even as I dealt with the eunuch!" They
passed the rest of the night conversing and cursing womankind,
and agreed to keep the matter secret, lest their father should
hear of it and kill the two women. Yet they ceased not to suffer
trouble and foresee affliction. And when the morrow dawned, the
King returned with his suite from hunting and sat awhile in his
chair of estate; after which he sent the Emirs about their
business and went up to his palace, where he found his two wives
lying a-bed and both exceeding sick and weak. Now they had made a
plot against their two sons and concerted to do away their lives,
for that they had exposed themselves before them and feared to be
at their mercy and dependent upon their forbearance. When Kamar
al-Zaman saw them on this wise, he said to them, "What aileth
you?" Whereupon they rose to him and kissing his hands answered,
perverting the case and saying "Know, O King, that thy two sons,
who have been reared in thy bounty, have played thee false and
have dishonoured thee in the persons of thy wives." Now when he
heard this, the light became darkness in his sight, and he raged
with such wrath that his reason fled: then said he to them,
"Explain me this matter." Replied Queen Budur, "O King of the
age, know that these many days past thy son As'ad hath been in
the persistent habit of sending me letters and messages to
solicit me to lewdness and adultery while I still forbade him
from this, but he would not be forbidden; and, when thou wentest
forth to hunt, he rushed in on me, drunk and with a drawn sword
in his hand, and smiting my eunuch, slew him. Then he mounted on
my breast, still holding the sword, and I feared lest he should
slay me, if I gainsaid him, even as he had slain my eunuch; so he
took his wicked will of me by force. And now if thou do me not
justice on him, O King, I will slay myself with my own hand, for
I have no need of life in the world after this foul deed." And
Queen Hayat al-Nufus, choking with tears, told him respecting
Prince Amjad a story like that of her sister-wife.--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

        When it was the Two Hundred and Twentieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Queen Hayat
al-Nufus told her husband, King Kamar al-Zaman, a story like that
of her sister in wedlock, Budur, and, quoth she, "The same thing
befel me with thy son Amjad;" after which she took to weeping and
wailing and said, "Except thou do me justice on him I will tell
my father, King Armanus." Then both women wept with sore weeping
before King Kamar al-Zaman who, when he saw their tears and heard
their words, concluded that their story was true and, waxing
wroth beyond measure of wrath, went forth thinking to fall upon
his two sons and put them to death. On his way he met his father-
in-law, King Armanus who, hearing of his return from the chase,
had come to salute him at that very hour and, seeing him with
naked brand in hand and blood dripping from his nostrils, for
excess of rage, asked what ailed him. So Kamar al-Zaman told him
all that his sons Amjad and As'ad had done and added, "And here I
am now going in to them to slay them in the foulest way and make
of them the most shameful of examples." Quoth King Armanus (and
indeed he too was wroth with them), "Thou dost well, O my son,
and may Allah not bless them nor any sons that do such deed
against their father's honour. But, O my son, the sayer of the
old saw saith, 'Whoso looketh not to the end hath not Fortune to
friend.' In any case, they are thy sons, and it befitteth not
that thou kill them with shine own hand, lest thou drink of their
death-agony, [FN#362] and anon repent of having slain them whenas
repentance availeth thee naught. Rather do thou send them with
one of thy Mamelukes into the desert and let him kill them there
out of thy sight, for, as saith the adage, 'Out of sight of my
friend is better and pleasanter.' [FN#363] And when Kamar al-Zaman
heard his father-in-law's words, he knew them to be just; so he
sheathed his sword and turning back, sat down upon the throne of
his realm. There he summoned his treasurer, a very old man,
versed in affairs and in fortune's vicissitudes, to whom he said,
"Go in to my sons, Amjad and As'ad; bind their hands behind them
with strong bonds, lay them in two chests and load them upon a
mule. Then take horse thou and carry them into mid desert, where
do thou kill them both and fill two vials with their blood and
bring the same to me in haste." Replied the treasurer, "I hear
and I obey," and he rose up hurriedly and went out forthright to
seek the Princes; and, on his road, he met them coming out of the
palace-vestibule, for they had donned their best clothes and
their richest; and they were on their way to salute their sire
and give him joy of his safe return from his going forth to hunt.
Now when he saw them, he laid hands on them, saying, "Omy sons,
know ye that I am but a slave commanded, and that your father
hath laid a commandment on me; will ye obey his commandment?"
They said, "Yes"; whereupon he went up to them and, after
pinioning their arms, laid them in the chests which he loaded on
the back of a mule he had taken from the city. And he ceased not
carrying them into the open country till near noon, when he
halted in a waste and desolate place and, dismounting from his
mare, let down the two chests from the mule's back. Then he
opened them and took out Amjad and As'ad; and when he looked upon
them he wept sore for their beauty and loveliness; then drawing
his sword he said to them, "By Allah, O my lords, indeed it is
hard for me to deal so evilly by you; but I am to be excused in
this matter, being but a slave commanded, for that your father
King Kamar al-Zaman hath bidden me strike off your heads." They
replied, "O Emir, do the King's bidding, for we bear with
patience that which Allah (to Whom be Honour, Might and Glory!)
hath decreed to us; and thou art quit of our blood." Then they
embraced and bade each other farewell, and As'ad said to the
treasurer, "Allah upon thee, O uncle, spare me the sight of my
brother's death-agony and make me not drink of his anguish, but
kill me first, for that were the easier for me." And Amjad said
the like and entreated the treasurer to kill him before As'ad,
saying, "My brother is younger than I; so make me not taste of
his anguish. And they both wept bitter tears whilst the treasurer
wept for their weeping;--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Twenty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
treasurer wept for their weeping; then the two brothers embraced
and bade farewell and one said to the other, "All this cometh of
the malice of those traitresses, my mother and thy mother; and
this is the reward of my forbearance towards thy mother and of
thy for bearance towards my mother! But there is no Might and
there is no Majesty save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!
Verily, we are Allah's and unto Him we are returning." [FN#364]
And As'ad em braced his brother, sobbing and repeating these
couplets,

"O Thou to whom sad trembling wights in fear complain! *
     O ever ready whatso cometh to sustain!
The sole resource for me is at Thy door to knock, *
     At whose door knock an Thou to open wilt not deign?
O Thou whose grace is treasured in the one word, Be! [FN#365] *
     Favour me, I beseech, in Thee all weals contain."

Now when Amjad heard his brother's weeping he wept also and
pressing him to his bosom repeated these two couplets,

"O Thou whose boons to me are more than one! *
     Whose gifts and favours have nor count nor bound!
No stroke of all Fate's strokes e'er fell on me, *
     But Thee to take me by the hand I found."

Then said Amjad to the treasurer, "I conjure thee by the One,
Omnipotent, the Lord of Mercy, the Beneficent! slay me before my
brother As'ad, so haply shall the fire be quencht in my heart's
core and in this life burn no more." But As'ad wept and
exclaimed, "Not so: I will die first;" whereupon quoth Amjad, "It
were best that I embrace thee and thou embrace me, so the sword
may fall upon us and slay us both at a single stroke." Thereupon
they embraced, face to face and clung to each other straitly,
whilst the treasurer tied up the twain and bound them fast with
cords, weeping the while. Then he drew his blade and said to
them, "By Allah, O my lords, it is indeed hard to me to slay you!
But have ye no last wishes that I may fulfil or charges which I
may carry out, or message which I may deliver?" Replied Amjad,
"We have no wish; and my only charge to thee is that thou set my
brother below and me above him, that the blow may fall on me
first, and when thou hast killed us and returnest to the King and
he asketh thee, 'What heardest thou from them before their
death?'; do thou answer, 'Verily thy sons salute thee and say to
thee, Thou knewest not if we were innocent or guilty, yet hast
thou put us to death and hast not certified thyself of our sin
nor looked into our case.' Then do thou repeat to him these two
couplets,

'Women are Satans made for woe o' men; *
     I fly to Allah from their devilish scathe:
Source of whatever bale befel our kind, *
     In wordly matters and in things of Faith.'"

Continued Amjad, "We desire of thee naught but that thou repeat
to our sire these two couplets."--And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

    When it was ad the Two Hundred and Twenty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Amjad
added, speaking to the treasurer, "We desire of thee naught but
that thou repeat to our sire these two couplets which thou hast
just now heard; and I conjure thee by Allah to have patience with
us, whilst I cite to my brother this other pair of couplets."
Then he wept with sore weeping and began,

"The Kings who fared before us showed *
     Of instances full many a show:
Of great and small and high and low *
     How many this one road have trod!"

Now when the treasurer heard these words from Amjad, he wept till
his beard was wet, whilst As'ad's eyes brimmed with tears and he
in turn repeated these couplets,

"Fate frights us when the thing is past and gone; *
     Weeping is not for form or face alone [FN#366]:
What ails the Nights? [FN#367] Allah blot out our sin, *
     And be the Nights by other hand undone!
Ere this Zubayr-son [FN#368] felt their spiteful hate, *
     Who fled for refuge to the House and Stone:
Would that when Kharijah was for Amru slain [FN#369] *
     They had ransomed Ali with all men they own."

Then, with cheeks stained by tears down railing he recited also
these verses,

"In sooth the Nights and Days are charactered *
     By traitor falsehood and as knaves they lie;
The Desert-reek [FN#370] recalls their teeth that shine; *
     All horrid blackness is their K of eye:
My sin anent the world which I abhor *
     Is sin of sword when sworders fighting hie."

Then his sobs waxed louder and he said,

"O thou who woo'st a World [FN#371] unworthy, learn *
     'Tis house of evils, 'tis Perdition's net:
A house where whoso laughs this day shall weep *
     The next: then perish house of fume and fret!
Endless its frays and forays, and its thralls *
     Are ne'er redeemed, while endless risks beset.
How many gloried in its pomps and pride, *
     Till proud and pompous did all bounds forget,
Then showing back of shield she made them swill [FN#372] *
     Full draught, and claimed all her vengeance debt.
For know her strokes fall swift and sure, altho' *
     Long bide she and forslow the course of Fate:
So look thou to thy days lest life go by *
     Idly, and meet thou more than thou hast met;
And cut all chains of world-love and desire *
     And save thy soul and rise to secrets higher."

Now when As'ad made an end of these verses, he strained his
brother Amjad in his arms, till they twain were one body, and the
treasurer, drawing his sword, was about to strike them, when
behold, his steed took fright at the wind of his upraised hand,
and breaking its tether, fled into the desert. Now the horse had
cost a thousand gold pieces and on its back was a splendid saddle
worth much money; so the treasurer threw down his sword, and ran
after his beast.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Twenty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when his
horse ran away, the treasurer ran after it in huge concern, and
ceased not running to catch the runaway till it entered a
thicket. He followed it whilst it dashed through the wood,
smiting the earth with its hoofs till it raised a dust-cloud
which towered high in air; and snorting and puffing and neighing
and waxing fierce and furious. Now there happened to be in this
thicket a lion of terrible might; hideous to sight, with eyes
sparkling light: his look was grim and his aspect struck fright
into man's sprite. Presentry the treasurer turned and saw the
lion making towards him; but found no way of escape nor had he
his sword with him. So he said in himself, "There is no Majesty
and there is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!
This strait is come upon me for no other cause but because of
Amjad and As'ad; and indeed this journey was unblest from the
first!" Meanwhile the two Princes were grievously oppressed by
the heat and grew sore athirst, so that their tongues hung out
and they cried for succour, but none came to their relief and
they said, "Would to Heaven we had been slain and were at peace
from this pain! But we know not whither the horse hath fled, that
the treasurer is gone and hath left us thus pinioned. If he would
but come back and do us die, it were easier to us than this
torture to aby." Said As'ad, "O my brother, be patient, and the
relief of Allah (extolled and exalted be He!) shall assuredly
come to us; for the horse started not away save of His favour
towards us, and naught irketh us but this thirst." Upon this he
stretched and shook himself and strained right and left, till he
burst his pinion-bonds; then he rose and unbound his brother and
catching up the Emir's sword, said, "By Allah, we will not go
hence, till we look after him and learn what is become of him."
Then they took to following on the trail till it led them to the
thicket and they said to each other, "Of a surety, the horse and
the treasurer have not passed out of this wood." Quoth As'ad,
"Stay thou here, whilst I enter the thicket and search it;" and
Amjad replied, "I will not let thee go in alone: nor will we
enter it but together; so if we escape, we shall escape together
and if we perish, we shall perish together." Accordingly both
entered and found that the lion had sprang upon the treasurer,
who lay like a sparrow in his grip, calling upon Allah for aid
and signing with his hands to Heaven. Now when Amjad saw this, he
took the sword and, rushing upon the lion, smote him between the
eyes and laid him dead on the ground. The Emir sprang up,
marvelling at this escape and seeing Amjad and As'ad, his
master's sons, standing there, cast himself at their feet and
exclaimed, "By Allah, O my lords, it were intolerable wrong in me
to do you to death. May the man never be who would kill you!
Indeed, with my very life, I will ransom you."--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

     When it was  the Two Hundred and Twenty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth the
treasurer to Amjad and As'ad, "With my life will I ransom you
both!" Then he hastily rose and, at once embracing them, enquired
how they had loosed their bonds and come thither; whereupon they
told him how the bonds of one of them had fallen loose and he had
unbound the other, whereto they were helped by the purity of
their intentions, and how they had tracked his trail till they
came upon him. So he thanked them for their deed and went with
them forth of the thicket; and, when they were in the open
country, they said to him, "O uncle, do our father's bidding." He
replied, "Allah forbid that I should draw near to you with hurt!
But know ye that I mean to take your clothes and clothe you with
mine; then will I fill two vials with the lion's blood and go
back to the King and tell him I have out vou to death. But as for
you two, fare ye forth into the lands, for Allah's earth is wide;
and know, O my lords, that it paineth me to part from you." At
this, they all fell a-weeping; then the two youths put off their
clothes and the treasurer habited them with his own. Moreover he
made two parcels of their dress and, filling two vials with the
lion's blood, set the parcels before him on his horse's back.
Presently he took leave of them and, making his way to the city,
ceased not faring till he went in to King Kamar al-Zaman and
kissed the ground between his hands. The King saw him changed in
face and troubled (which arose from his adventure with the lion)
and, deeming this came of the slaughter of his two sons, rejoiced
and said to him, "Hast thou done the work?" "Yes, O our lord,"
replied the treasurer and gave him the two parcels of clothes and
the two vials full of blood. Asked the King, "What didst thou
observe in them; and did they give thee any charge?" Answered the
treasurer, "I found them patient and resigned to what came down
upon them and they said to me, 'Verily, our father is excusable;
bear him our salutation and say to him, 'Thou art quit of our
killing. But we charge thee repeat to him these couplets,

'Verily women are devils created for us. We seek refuge with God
from the artifice of the devils.
They are the source of all the misfortunes that have appeared
among mankind in the affairs of the world and of
religion.''' [FN#373]

When the King heard these words of the treasurer, he bowed his
head earthwards, a long while and knew his sons' words to mean
that they had been wrongfully put to death. Then he bethought
himself of the perfidy of women and the calamities brought about
by them; and he took the two parcels and opened them and fell to
turning over his sons' clothes and weeping,--And Shahrazed
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Twenty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when King
Kamar la-Zaman opened the two bundles and fell to turning over
his sons' clothes and weeping, it so came to pass that he found,
in the pocket of his son As'ad's raiment, a letter in the hand of
his wife enclosing her hair strings; so he opened and read it and
understanding the contents knew that the Prince had been falsely
accused and wrongously. Then he searched Amjad's parcel of dress
and found in his pocket a letter in the handwriting of Queen
Hayat al-Nufus enclosing also her hair-strings; so he opened and
read it and knew that Amjad too had been wronged; whereupon he
beat hand upon hand and exclaimed, "There is no Majesty and there
is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great! I have slain
my sons unjustly." And he buffeted his face, crying out, "Alas,
my sons! Alas, my long grief!" Then he bade them build two tombs
in one house, which he styled "House of Lamentations," and had
graved thereon his sons' names; and he threw himself on Amjad's
tomb, weeping and groaning and lamenting, and improvised these
couplets,

"O moon for ever set this earth below, *
     Whose loss bewail the stars which stud the sky!
O wand, which broken, ne'er with bend and wave *
     Shall fascinate the ravisht gazer's eye;
These eyne for jealousy I 'reft of thee, *
     Nor shall they till next life thy sight descry:
I'm drowned in sea of tears for insomny *
     Wherefore, indeed in Sahirah-stead [FN#374] I lie."

Then he threw himself on As'ad's tomb, groaning and weeping and
lamenting and versifying with these couplets,

"Indeed I longed to share unweal with thee, *
     But Allah than my will willed otherwise:
My grief all blackens 'twixt mine eyes and space, *
     Yet whitens all the blackness from mine eyes: [FN#375]
Of tears they weep these eyne run never dry, *
     And ulcerous flow in vitals never dries:
Right sore it irks me seeing thee in stead [FN#376] *
     Where slave with sovran for once levelled lies."

And his weeping and wailing redoubled; and, after he had ended
his lamentations and his verse, he forsook his friends and
intimates, and denying himself to his women and his family, cut
himself off from the world in the House of Lamentations, where he
passed his time in weeping for his sons. Such was his case; but
as regards Amjad and As'ad they fared on into the desert eating
of the fruits of the earth and drinking of the remnants of the
rain for a full month, till their travel brought them to a
mountain of black flint [FN#377] whose further end was unknown;
and here the road forked, one line lying along the midway height
and the other leading to its head. They took the way trending to
the top and gave not over following it five days, but saw no end
to it and were overcome with weariness, being unused to walking
upon the mountains or elsewhere. [FN#378] At last, despairing of
coming to the last of the road, they retraced their steps and,
taking the other, that led over the midway heights,--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Twenty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Princes
Amjad and As'ad returned from the path leading to the Mountain-
head and took that which ran along the midway heights, and walked
through all that day till nightfall, when As'ad, weary with much
travel, said to Amjad, "O my brother, I can walk no farther, for
I am exceeding weak." Replied Amjad, "O my brother, take courage!
May be Allah will send us relief." So they walked on part of the
night, till the darkness closed in upon them, when As'ad became
weary beyond measure of weariness and cried out, "O my brother, I
am worn out and spent with walking," and threw himself upon the
ground and wept. Amjad took him in his arms and walked on with
him, bytimes sitting down to rest till break of day, when they
came to the mountain-top and found there a stream of running
water and by it a pomegranate-tree and a prayer-niche. [FN#379]
They could hardly believe their eyes when they saw it; but,
sitting down by that spring, drank of its water and ate of the
fruit of that granado-tree; after which they lay on the ground
and slept till sunrise, when they washed and bathed in the spring
and, eating of the pomegranates, slept again till the time of
mid-afternoon prayer. Then they thought to continue their
journey, but As'ad could not walk, for both his feet were
swollen. So they abode there three days till they were rested,
after which they set out again and fared on over the mountain
days and nights, tortured by and like to die of thirst, till they
sighted a city gleaming afar off, at which they rejoiced and made
towards it. When they drew near it, they thanked Allah (be His
Name exalted!) and Amjad said to As'ad, "O my brother, sit here,
whilst I go to yonder city and see what it is and whose it is and
where we are in Allah's wide world, that we may know through what
lands we have passed in crossing this mountain, whose skirts had
we followed, we had not reached this city in a whole year. So
praised be Allah for safety!" Replied As'ad, "By Allah, O my
brother, none shall go down into that city save myself, and may I
be thy ransom! If thou leave me alone, be it only for an hour, I
shall imagine a thousand things and be drowned in a torrent of
anxiety on shine account, for I cannot brook shine absence from
me." Amjad rejoined, "Go then and tarry not. So As'ad took some
gold pieces, and leaving his brother to await him, descended the
mountain and ceased not faring on till he entered the city. As he
threaded the streets he was met by an old man age-decrepit, whose
beard flowed down upon his breast and forked in twain; [FN#380] he
bore a walking-staff in his hand and was richly clad, with a
great red turband on his head. When As'ad saw him, he wondered at
his dress and his mien; nevertheless, he went up to him and
saluting him said, "Where be the way to the market, O my master?"
Hearing these words the Shaykh smiled in his face and replied, "O
my son, meseemeth thou art a stranger?" As'ad rejoined, "Yes, I
am a stranger."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Two Hundred and Twenty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Shaykh
who met As'ad smiled in his face and said to him, "O my son,
meseemeth thou art a stranger?" and As'ad replied, "Yes, I am a
stranger." Then rejoined the old man, "Verily, thou gladdenest
our country with thy presence, O my son, and thou desolatest
shine own land by reason of shine absence. What wantest thou of
the market?" Quoth As'ad, "O uncle, I have a brother, with whom I
have come from a far land and with whom I have journeyed these
three months; and, when we sighted this city, I left him, who is
my elder brother, upon the mountain and came hither, purposing to
buy victual and what else, and return therewith to him, that we
might feed thereon." Said the old man, "Rejoice in all good, O my
son, and know thou that to-day I give a marriage-feast, to which
I have bidden many guests, and I have made ready plenty of meats,
the best and most delicious that heart can desire. So if thou
wilt come with me to my place, I will give thee freely all thou
lackest without asking thee a price or aught else. Moreover I
will teach thee the ways of this city; and, praised be Allah, O
my son, that I, and none other have happened upon thee." "As thou
wilt," answered As'ad, "do as thou art disposed, but make haste,
for indeed my brother awaiteth me and his whole heart is with
me." The old man took As'ad by the hand and carried him to a
narrow lane, smiling in his face and saying, "Glory be to Him who
hath delivered thee from the people of this city!" And he ceased
not walking till he entered a spacious house, wherein was a
saloon and behold, in the middle of it were forty old men, well
stricken in years, collected together and forming a single ring
as they sat round about a lighted fire, to which they were doing
worship and prostrating themselves. [FN#381] When As'ad saw this,
he was confounded and the hair of his body stood on end though he
knew not what they were; and the Shaykh said to them, "O Elders
of the Fire, how blessed is this day!" Then he called aloud,
saying, "Hello, Ghazban!" Whereupon there came out to him a tall
black slave of frightful aspect, grim-visaged and flat nosed as
an ape who, when the old man made a sign to him, bent As'ad's
arms behind his back and pinioned them; after which the Shaykh
said to him, "Let him down into the vault under the earth and
there leave him and say to my slave girl Such-an-one, 'Torture
him night and day and give him a cake of bread to eat morning and
evening against the time come of the voyage to the Blue Sea and
the Mountain of Fire, whereon we will slaughter him as a
sacrifice.'" So the black carried him out at another door and,
raising a flag in the floor, discovered a flight of twenty steps
leading to a chamber [FN#382] under the earth, into which he
descended with him and, laying his feet in irons, gave him over
to the slave girl and went away. Meanwhile, the old men said to
one another, "When the day of the Festival of the Fire cometh, we
will sacrifice him on the mountain, as a propitiatory offering
whereby we shall pleasure the Fire." Presently the damsel went
down to him and beat him a grievous beating, till streams of
blood flowed from his sides and he fainted; after which she set
at his head a scone of bread and a cruse of brackish water and
went away and left him. In the middle of the night, he revived
and found himself bound and beaten and sore with beating: so he
wept bitter tears; and recalling his former condition of honour
and prosperity, lordship and dominion, and his separation from
his sire and his exile from his native land.--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say,

      When it was the Two Hundred and Twenty-eighth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when As'ad
found himself bound and beaten and sore with beating he recalled
his whilome condition of honour and prosperity and dominion and
lordship, and he wept and groaned aloud and recited these
couplets,

"Stand by the ruined stead and ask of us; *
     Nor deem we dwell there as was state of us:
The World, that parter, hath departed us; *
     Yet soothes not hate-full hearts the fate of us:
With whips a cursed slave girl scourges us, *
     And teems her breast with rancorous hate of us:
Allah shall haply deign to unpart our lives, *
     Chastise our foes, and end this strait of us."

And when As'ad had spoken his poetry, he put out his hand towards
his head and finding there the crust and the cruse full of
brackish water he ate a bittock, just enough to keep life in him,
and drank a little water, but could get no sleep till morning for
the swarms of bugs [FN#383] and lice. As soon as it was day, the
slave girl came down to him and changed his clothes, which were
drenched with blood and stuck to him, so that his skin came off
with the shirt; wherefor he shrieked aloud and cried, "Alas!" and
said, "O my God, if this be Thy pleasure, increase it upon me! O
Lord, verily Thou art not unmindful of him that oppresseth me; do
Thou then avenge me upon him!" And he groaned and repeated the
following verses,

"Patient, O Allah! to Thy destiny *
     I bow, suffice me what Thou deign decree:
Patient to bear Thy will, O Lord of me, *
     Patient to burn on coals of Ghaza-tree:
They wrong me, visit me with hurt and harm; *
     Haply Thy grace from them shall set me free:
Far be's, O Lord, from thee to spare the wronger *
     O Lord of Destiny my hope's in Thee!"

And what another saith,

"Bethink thee not of worldly state, *
     Leave everything to course of Fate;
For oft a thing that irketh thee *
     Shall in content eventuate;
And oft what strait is shall expand, *
     And what expanded is wax strait.
Allah will do what wills His will *
     So be not thou importunate!
But 'joy the view of coming weal *
     Shall make forget past bale and bate."

And when he had ended his verse, the slave-girl came down upon
him with blows till he fainted again; and, throwing him a flap of
bread and a gugglet of saltish water, went away and left him sad
and lonely, bound in chains of iron, with the blood streaming
from his sides and far from those he loved. So he wept and called
to mind his brother and the honours he erst enjoyed.--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her
permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Twenty-ninth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that As'ad
called to mind his brother and the honours he erst enjoyed; so he
wept and groaned and complained and poured forth tears in floods
and improvised these couplets,

"Easy, O Fate! how long this wrong, this injury, *
     Robbing each morn and eve my brotherhood fro' me?
Is't not time now thou deem this length sufficiency *
     Of woes and, O thou Heart of Rock, show clemency?
My friends thou wrongedst when thou madst each enemy *
     Mock and exult me for thy wrongs, thy tyranny:
My foeman's heart is solaced by the things he saw *
     In me, of strangerhood and lonely misery:
Suffice thee not what came upon my head of dole, *
     Friends lost for evermore, eyes wan and pale of blee?
But must in prison cast so narrow there is naught *
     Save hand to bite, with bitten hand for company;
And tears that tempest down like goodly gift of cloud, *
     And longing thirst whose fires weet no satiety.
Regretful yearnings, singulfs and unceasing sighs, *
     Repine, remembrance and pain's very ecstacy:
Desire I suffer sore and melancholy deep, *
     And I must bide a prey to endless phrenesy:
I find me ne'er a friend who looks with piteous eye, *
     And seeks my presence to allay my misery:
Say, liveth any intimate with trusty love *
     Who for mine ills will groan, my sleepless malady?
To whom moan I can make and, peradventure, he *
     Shall pity eyes that sight of sleep can never see?
The flea and bug suck up my blood, as wight that drinks *
     Wine from the proffering hand of fair virginity:
Amid the lice my body aye remindeth me *
     Of orphan's good in Kazi's claw of villainy:
My home's a sepulchre that measures cubits three, *
     Where pass I morn and eve in chained agony:
My wines are tears, my clank of chains takes music's stead, *
     Cares my dessert of fruit and sorrows are my bed."

And when he had versed his verse and had prosed his prose, he
again groaned and complained and remembered he had been and how
he had been parted from his brother. Thus far concerning him; but
as regards his brother Amjad, he awaited As'ad till mid-day yet
he returned not to him: whereupon Amjad's vitals fluttered, the
pangs of parting were sore upon him and he poured forth abundant
tears,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.

        When it was the Two Hundred and Thirtieth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Amjad
awaited his brother As'ad till mid-day and he returned not to
him, Amjad's vitals fluttered; the pangs of parting were sore
upon him and he poured forth abundant tears, exclaiming, "Alas,
my brother! Alas, my friend! Alas my grief! How I feared me we
should be separated!" Then he descended from the mountain-top
with the tears running down his cheeks; and, entering the city,
ceased not walking till he made the market. He asked the folk the
name of the place and concerning its people and they said, "This
is called the City of the Magians, and its citizens are mostly
given to Fire-worshipping in lieu of the Omnipotent King." Then
he enquired of the City of Ebony and they answered, "Of a truth
it is a year's journey thither by land and six months by sea: it
was governed erst by a King called Armanus; but he took to son-
in-law and made King in his stead a Prince called Kamar al-Zaman
distinguished for justice and munificence, equity and
benevolence." When Amjad heard tell of his father, he groaned and
wept and lamented and knew not whither to go. However, he bought
a something of food and carried it to a retired spot where he sat
down thinking to eat; but, recalling his brother, he fell a-
weeping and swallowed but a morsel to keep breath and body
together, and that against his will. Then he rose and walked
about the city, seeking news of his brother, till he saw a Moslem
tailor sitting in his shop so he sat down by him and told him his
story; whereupon quoth the tailor, "If he have fallen into the
hands of the Magians, thou shalt hardly see him again: yet it may
be Allah will reunite you twain. But thou, O my brother," he
continued wilt thou lodge with me?" Amjad answered, "Yes"; and
the tailor rejoiced at this. So he abode with him many days, what
while the tailor comforted him and exhorted him to patience and
taught him tailoring, till he became expert in the craft. Now one
day he went forth to the sea-shore and washed his clothes; after
which he entered the bath and put on clean raiment; then he
walked about the city, to divert himself with its sights and
presently there met him on the way a woman of passing beauty and
loveliness, without peer for grace and comeliness. When she saw
him she raised her face-veil and signed to him by moving her
eyebrows and her eyes with luring glances, and versified these
couplets,

"I drooped my glance when seen thee on the way *
     As though, O slim-waist! felled by Sol's hot ray:
Thou art the fairest fair that e'er appeared, *
     Fairer to-day than fair of yesterday: [FN#384]
Were Beauty parted, a fifth part of it *
     With Joseph or a part of fifth would stay;
The rest would fly to thee, shine ownest own; *
     Be every soul thy sacrifice, I pray!"

When Amjad heard these her words, they gladdened his heart which
inclined to her and his bowels yearned towards her and the hands
of love sported with him; so he sighed to her in reply and spoke
these couplets,

"Above the rose of cheek is thorn of lance; [FN#385] *
     Who dareth pluck it, rashest chevisance?
Stretch not thy hand towards it, for night long *
     Those lances marred because we snatched a glance!
Say her, who tyrant is and tempter too *
     (Though justice might her tempting power enhance):--
Thy face would add to errors were it veiled; *
     Unveiled I see its guard hath best of chance!
Eye cannot look upon Sol's naked face; *
     But can, when mist-cloud dims his countenance:
The honey-hive is held by honey-bee; [FN#386] *
     Ask the tribe-guards what wants their vigilance?
An they would slay me, let them end their ire *
     Rancorous, and grant us freely to advance:
They're not more murderous, an charge the whole *
     Than charging glance of her who wears the mole."

And hearing these lines from Amjad she sighed with the deepest
sighs and, signing to him again, repeated these couplets,

"'Tis thou hast trodden coyness path not I: *
     Grant me thy favours for the time draws nigh:
O thou who makest morn with light of brow, *
     And with loosed brow-locks night in lift to stye!
Thine idol-aspect made of me thy slave, *
     Tempting as temptedst me in days gone by:
'Tis just my liver fry with hottest love: *
     Who worship fire for God must fire aby:
Thou sellest like of me for worthless price; *
     If thou must sell, ask high of those who buy."

When Amjad heard these her words he said to her, "Wilt thou come
to my lodging or shall I go with thee to shine?" So she hung her
head in shame to the ground and repeated the words of Him whose
Name be exalted, "Men shall have the pre-eminence above women,
because of those advantages wherein Allah hath caused the one of
them to excel the other." [FN#387] Upon this, Amjad took the
hint.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Thirty-first Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Amjad took
the woman's hint and understood that she wished to go with him
whither he was going; he felt himself bounder to find a place
wherein to receive her, but was ashamed to carry her to the house
of his host, the tailor. So he walked on and she walked after
him, and the two ceased not walking from street to street and
place to place, till she was tired and said to him, "O my lord,
where is thy house?" Answered he, "Before us a little way." Then
he turned aside into a handsome by-street, followed by the young
woman, and walked on till he came to the end, when he found it
was no thoroughfare and exclaimed, "There is no Majesty and there
is no Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!" Then raising
his eyes, he saw, at the upper end of the lane a great doer with
two stone benches; but it was locked. So Amjad sat down on one of
the benches and she on the other; and she said to him, "O my
lord, wherefore waitest thou?" He bowed his head awhile to the
ground then raised it and answered, "I am awaiting my Mameluke
who hath the key; for I bade him make me ready meat and drink and
flowers, to deck the wine-service against my return from the
bath." But he said to himself, "Haply the time will be tedious to
her and she will go about her business, leaving me here, when I
will wend my own way." However, as soon as she was weary of long
waiting, she said, "O my lord, thy Mameluke delayeth; and here
are we sitting in the street;" and she arose and took a stone and
went up to the lock. Said Amjad, "Be not in haste, but have
patience till the servant come." However, she hearkened not to
him, but smote the wooden bolt with the stone and broke it in
half, whereupon the door opened. Quoth he, "What possessed thee
to do this deed?" Quoth she, "Pooh, pooh, my lord! what matter
it? Is not the house thy house and thy place?" He said, "There
was no need to break the bolt." Then the damsel entered, to the
confusion of Amjad, who knew not what to do for fear of the
people of the house; but she said to him, "Why dost thou not
enter, O light of mine eyes and core of my heart?" Replied he, "I
hear and obey; but my servant tarrieth long and I know not if he
have done aught of what I bade him and specially enjoined upon
him, or not." Hereupon he entered, sore in fear of the people of
the house, and found himself in a handsome saloon with four
dais'd recesses, each facing other, and containing closets and
raised seats, all bespread with stuffs of silk and brocade; and
in the midst was a jetting fountain of costly fashion, on whose
margin rested a covered tray of meats, with a leather tablecloth
hanging up and gem-encrusted dishes, full of fruits and sweet-
scented flowers. Hard by stood drinking vessels and a candlestick
with a single wax-candle therein; and the place was full of
precious stuffs and was ranged with chests and stools, and on
each seat lay a parcel of clothes upon which was a purse full of
monies, gold and silver. The floor was paved with marble and the
house bore witness in every part to its owner's fortune. When
Amjad saw all this, he was confounded at his case and said to
himself, "I am a lost man! Verily we are Allah's and to Allah we
are returning!" As for the damsel, when she sighted the place she
rejoiced indeed with a joy nothing could exceed, and said to him,
"By Allah, O my lord, thy servant hath not failed of his duty;
for see, he hath swept the place and cooked the meat and set on
the fruit; and indeed I come at the best of times." But he paid
no heed to her, his heart being taken up with fear of the house-
folk; and she said, "Fie, O my lord, O my heart! What aileth thee
to stand thus?" Then she sighed and, giving him a buss which
sounded like the cracking of a walnut, said, "O my lord, an thou
have made an appointment with other than with me, I will gird my
middle and serve her and thee. Amjad laughed from a heart full of
rage and wrath and came forwards and sat down, panting and saying
to himself, "Alack, mine ill death and doom when the owner of the
place shall return!" Then she seated herself by him and fell to
toying and laughing, whilst Amjad sat careful and frowning,
thinking a thousand thoughts and communing with himself,
"Assuredly the master of the house cannot but come, and then what
shall I say to him? he needs must kill me and my life will be
lost thus foolishly." Presently she rose and, tucking up her
sleeves, took a tray of food on which she laid the cloth and then
set it before Amjad and began to eat, saying, "Eat, O my lord."
So he came forward and ate; but the food was not pleasant to him;
on the contrary he ceased not to look towards the door, till the
damsel had eaten her fill, when she took away the tray of the
meats and, setting on the dessert, fell to eating of the dried
fruits. Then she brought the wine service and opening the jar,
filled a cup and handed it to Amjad, who took it from her hand
saying to him self, ' Ah, ah! and well away, when the master of
the house cometh and seeth me!"; and he kept his eyes fixed on
the threshold, even with cup in hand. While he was in this case,
lo! in came the master of the house, who was a white slave, one
of the chief men of the city, being Master of the Horse [FN#388]
to the King. He had fitted up this saloon for his pleasures, that
he might make merry therein and be private with whom he would,
and he had that day bidden a youth whom he loved and had made
this entertainment for him. Now the name of this slave was
Bahadur, [FN#389] and he was open of hand, generous, munificent
and fain of alms-giving and charitable works.--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.

      When it wad the Two Hundred and Thirty-second Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
Bahadur, the Master of the Horse and the owner of the house, came
to the door of the saloon and found it open, he entered slowly
and softly and looking in, with head advanced and out stretched
neck, saw Amjad and the girl sitting before the dish of fruit and
the wine-jar in front of them. Now Amjad at that moment had the
cup in his hand and his face turned to the door; and when his
glance met Bahadur's eyes his hue turned pale yellow and his
side-muscles quivered, so seeing his trouble Bahadur signed to
him with his finger on his lips, as much as to say, "Be silent
and come hither to me." Whereupon he set down the cup and rose
and the damsel cried, "Whither away?" He shook his head and,
signing to her that he wished to make water, went out into the
passage barefoot. Now when he saw Bahadur he knew him for the
master of the house; so he hastened to him and, kissing his
hands, said to him, "Allah upon thee, O my lord, ere thou do me a
hurt, hear what I have to say." Then he told him who he was from
first to last and acquainted him with what caused him to quit his
native land and royal state, and how he had not entered his house
of his free will, but that it was the girl who had broken the
lock-bolt and done all this. [FN#390] When Bahadur heard his story
and knew that he was a King's son, he felt for him and, taking
compassion on him, said, "Hearken to me, O Amjad, and do what I
bid thee and I will guarantee thy safety from that thou fearest;
but, if thou cross me, I will kill thee." Amjad replied, "Command
me as thou wilt: I will not gainsay thee in aught; no, never, for
I am the freedman of thy bounty." Rejoined Bahadur, "Then go back
forthwith into the saloon, sit down in thy place and be at peace
and at shine ease; I will presently come in to thee, and when
thou seest me (remember my name is Bahadur) do thou revile me and
rail at me, saying, 'What made thee tarry till so late?' And
accept no excuse from me; nay, so far from it, rise and beat me;
and, if thou spare me, I will do away thy life. Enter now and
make merry and whatsoever thou seekest of me at this time I will
bring thee forthwith; and do thou spend this night as thou wilt
and on the morrow wend thy way. This I do in honour of thy
strangerhood, for I love the stranger and hold myself bounder to
do him devoir." So Amjad kissed his hand, and, returning to the
saloon with his face clad in its natural white and red, at once
said to the damsel, "O my mistress, thy presence hath gladdened
this shine own place and ours is indeed a blessed night." Quoth
the girl, "Verily I see a wonderful change in thee, that thou now
welcomest me so cordially!" So Amjad answered, "By Allah, O my
lady, methought my servant Bahadur had robbed me of some
necklaces of jewels, worth ten thousand diners each; however,
when I went out but now in concern for this, I sought for them
and found them in their place. I know not why the slave tarrieth
so long and needs must I punish him for it." She was satisfied
with his answer, and they sported and drank and made merry and
ceased not to be so till near sundown, when Bahadur came in to
them, having changed his clothes and girt his middle and put on
shoes, such as are worn of Mamelukes. He saluted and kissed the
ground; then held his hands behind him and stood, with his head
hanging down, as one who confesseth to a fault. So Amjad looked
at him with angry eyes and asked, "Why hast thou tarried till
now, O most pestilent of slaves?" Answered Bahadur, "O my lord, I
was busy washing my clothes and knew not of thy being here; for
our appointed time was nightfall and not day-tide." But Amjad
cried out at him, saying, "Thou liest, O vilest of slaves! By
Allah, I must needs beat thee." So he rose and, throwing Bahadur
prone on the ground, took a stick and beat him gently; but the
damsel sprang up and, snatching the stick from his hand, came
down upon Bahadur so lustily, that in extreme pain the tears ran
from his eyes and he ground his teeth together and called out for
succour; whilst Amjad cried out to the girl "Don't"; and she
cried out, "Let me satisfy my anger upon him!" till at last he
pulled the stick out of her hand and pushed her away. So Bahadur
rose and, wiping away his tears from his cheeks, waited upon them
the while, after which he swept the hall and lighted the lamps;
but as often as he went in and out, the lady abused him and
cursed him till Amjad was wroth with her and said, "For Almighty
Allah's sake leave my Mameluke; he is not used to this." Then
they sat and ceased not eating and drinking (and Bahadur waiting
upon them) till midnight when, being weary with service and
beating, he fell asleep in the midst of the hall and snored and
snorted; whereupon the damsel, who was drunken with wine, said to
Amjad, "Arise, take the sword hanging yonder and cut me off this
slave's head; and, if thou do it not, I will be the death of
thee!" "What possesseth thee to slay my slave?" asked Amjad; and
she answered, "Our joyaunce will not be complete but by his
death. If thou wilt not kill him, I will do it myself." Quoth
Amjad, "By Allah's rights to thee, do not this thing!" Quoth she,
"It must perforce be;" and, taking down the sword, drew it and
made at Bahadur to kill him; but Amjad said in his mind, "This
man hath entreated us courteously and sheltered us and done us
kindness and made himself my slave: shall we requite him by
slaughtering him? This shall never be!" Then he said to the
woman, "If my Mameluke must be killed, better I should kill him
than thou." So saying, he took the sword from her and, raising
his hand, smote her on the neck and made her head fly from her
body. It fell upon Bahadur who awoke and sat up and opened his
eyes, when he saw Amjad standing by him and in his hand the sword
dyed with blood, and the damsel lying dead. He enquired what had
passed, and Amjad told him all she had said, adding, "Nothing
would satisfy her but she must slay thee; and this is her
reward." Then Bahadur rose and, kissing the Prince's hand, said
to him, "Would to Heaven thou hadst spared her! but now there is
nothing for it but to rid us of her without stay or delay, before
the day-break." Then he girded his loins and took the body,
wrapped it in an Aba-cloak and, laying it in a large basket of
palm-leaves, he shouldered it saying, "Thou art a stranger here
and knowest no one: so sit thou in this place and await my return
till day-break. If I come back to thee, I will assuredly do thee
great good service and use my endeavours to have news of thy
brother; but if by sunrise I return not, know that all is over
with me; and peace be on thee, and the house and all it
containeth of stuffs and money are shine." Then he fared forth
from the saloon bearing the basket; and, threading the streets,
he made for the salt sea, thinking to throw it therein: but as he
drew near the shore, he turned and saw that the Chief of Police
and his officers had ranged themselves around him; and, on
recognising him, they wondered and opened the basket, wherein
they found the slain woman. So they seized him and laid him in
bilboes all that night till the morning, when they carried him
and the basket, as it was, to the King and reported the case. The
King was sore enraged when he looked upon the slain and said to
Bahadur, "Woe to thee! Thou art always so doing; thou killest
folk and castest them into the sea and takest their goods. How
many murders hast thou done ere this?" Thereupon Bahadur hung his
head.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.

      When it was the Two  Hundred and Thirty-third Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Bahadur
hung down his head groundwards before the King, who cried out at
him, saying, "Woe to thee! Who killed this girl?" He replied, "O
my lord! I killed her, and there is no Majesty and there is no
Might save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!" [FN#391] So the
King in his anger, commanded to hang him; and the hangman went
down with him by the King's commandment, and the Chief of Police
accompanied him with a crier who called upon all the folk to
witness the execution of Bahadur, the King's Master of the Horse;
and on this wise they paraded him through the main streets and
the market-streets. This is how it fared with Bahadur; but as
regards Amjad, he awaited his host's return till the day broke
and the sun rose, and when he saw that he came not, he exclaimed,
"There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah, the
Glorious, the Great! Would I knew what is become of him?" And, as
he sat musing behold, he heard the crier proclaiming Bahadur's
sentence and bidding the people to see the spectacle of his
hanging at midday; whereat he wept and exclaimed, "Verily, we are
Allah's and to Him we are returning! He meaneth to sacrifice
himself unjustly for my sake, when I it was who slew her. By
Allah, this shall never be!" Then he went from the saloon and,
shutting the door after him, hurriedly threaded the streets till
he overtook Bahadur, when he stood before the Chief of Police and
said to him, "O my lord, put not Bahadur to death, for he is
innocent. By Allah, none killed her but I." Now when the Captain
of Police heard these words, he took them both and, carrying them
before the King, acquainted him with what Amjad had said;
whereupon he looked at the Prince and asked him, "Didst thou kill
the damsel?" He answered, "Yes" and the King said, "Tell me why
thou killedst her, and speak the truth." Replied Amjad, "O King,
it is indeed a marvellous event and a wondrous matter that hath
befallen me: were it graven with needles on the eye-corners, it
would serve as a warner to whoso would be warned!" Then he told
him his whole story and informed him of all that had befallen him
and his brother, first and last; whereat the King was much
startled and surprised and said to him, "Know that now I find
thee to be excusable; but list, O youth! Wilt thou be my Wazir?"
"Hearkening and obedience," answered Amjad whereupon the King
bestowed magnificent dresses of honour on him and Bahadur and
gave him a handsome house, with eunuchs and officers and all
things needful, appointing him stipends and allowances and
bidding him make search for his brother As'ad. So Amjad sat down
in the seat of the Wazirate and governed and did justice and
invested and deposed and took and gave. Moreover, he sent out a
crier to cry his brother throughout the city, and for many days
made proclamation in the main streets and market-streets, but
heard no news of As'ad nor happened on any trace of him. Such was
his case; but as regards his brother, the Magi ceased not to
torture As'ad night and day and eve and morn for a whole year's
space, till their festival drew near, when the old man
Bahram [FN#392] made ready for the voyage and fitted out a ship
for himself.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Thirty-fourth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Bahram, the
Magian, having fitted out a ship for the voyage, took As'ad and
put him in a chest which he locked and had it transported on
board. Now it so came to pass that, at the very time of shipping
it, Amjad was standing to divert himself by looking upon the sea;
and when he saw the men carrying the gear and shipping it, his
heart throbbed and he called to his pages to bring him his beast.
Then, mounting with a company of his officers, he rode down to
the sea-side and halted before the Magian's ship, which he
commended his men to board and search. They did his bidding, and
boarded the vessel and rummaged in every part, but found nothing;
so they returned and told Amjad, who mounted again and rode back.
But he felt troubled in mind; and when he reached his place and
entered his palace, he cast his eyes on the wall and saw written
thereon two lines which were these couplets,

"My friends! if ye are banisht from mine eyes, *
     From heart and mind ye ne'er go wandering:
But ye have left me in my woe, and rob *
     Rest from my eyelids while ye are slumbering."

And seeing them Amjad thought of his brother and wept. Such was
his case; but as for Bahram, the Magian, he embarked and shouted
and bawled to his crew to make sail in all haste. So they shook
out the sails and departed and ceased not to fare on many days
and nights; and, every other day, Bahram took out As'ad and gave
him a bit of bread and made him drink a sup of water, till they
drew near the Mountain of Fire. Then there came out on them a
storm-wind and the sea rose against them, so that the ship was
driven out of her course till she took a wrong line and fell into
strange waters; and, at last they came in sight of a city builded
upon the shore, with a castle whose windows overlooked the main.
Now the ruler of this city was a Queen called Marjanah, and the
captain said to Bahram, "O my lord, we have strayed from our
course and come to the island of Queen Marjanah, who is a devout
Moslemah; and, if she know that we are Magians, she will take our
ship and slay us to the last man. Yet needs must we put in here
to rest and refit." Quoth Bahram, "Right is thy recking, and
whatso thou seest fit that will I do!" Said the ship master, "If
the Queen summon us and question us, how shall we answer her?";
and Bahram replied, "Let us clothe this Moslem we have with us in
a Mameluke's habit and carry him ashore with us, so that when the
Queen sees him, she will suppose and say, 'This is a slave.' As
for me I will tell her that I am a slave-dealer [FN#393] who buys
and sells white slaves, and that I had with me many but have sold
all save this one, whom I retained to keep my accounts, for he
can read and write." And the captain said "This device should
serve." Presently they reached the city and slackened sail and
cast the anchors; and the ship lay still, when behold, Queen
Marjanah came down to them, attended by her guards and, halting
before the vessel, called out to the captain, who landed and
kissed the ground before her. Quoth she, "What is the lading of
this thy ship and whom hast thou with thee?"" Quoth he, "O Queen
of the Age, I have with me a merchant who dealeth in slaves." And
she said, "Hither with him to me"; whereupon Bahram came ashore
to her, with As'ad walking behind him in a slave's habit, and
kissed the earth before her. She asked, "What is thy condition?";
and he answered, "I am a dealer in chattels." Then she looked at
As'ad and, taking him for a Mameluke, asked him, "What is thy
name, O youth?" He answered, "Dost thou ask my present or my
former name?" "Hast thou then two names?" enquired she, and he
replied (and indeed his voice was choked with tears), "Yes; my
name aforetime was Al-As'ad, the most happy, but now it is Al-
Mu'tarr--Miserrimus." Her heart inclined to him and she said,
"Canst thou write?" "Yes,'' answered he, and she gave him ink-
case and reed-pen and paper and said to him, "Write somewhat that
I may see it." So he wrote these two couplets,

"What can the slave do when pursued by Fate, *
     O justest Judge! whatever be his state? [FN#394]
Whom God throws hand bound in the depths and says, *
     Beware lest water should thy body wet?" [FN#395]

Now when she read these lines, she had ruth upon him and said to
Bahram, "Sell me this slave." He replied, "O my lady, I cannot
sell him, for I have parted with all the rest and none is left
with me but he." Quoth the Queen, "I must need have him of thee,
either by sale or way of gift." But quoth Bahram, "I will neither
sell him nor give him." Whereat she was wroth and, taking As'ad
by the hand, carried him up to the castle and sent to Bahram,
saying, "Except thou set sail and depart our city this very
night, I will seize all thy goods and break up thy ship." Now
when the message reached the Magian, he grieved with sore grief
and cried, "Verily this voyage is on no wise to be commended."
Then he arose and made ready and took all he needed and awaited
the coming of the night to resume his voyage, saying to the
sailors, "Provide yourselves with your things and fill your
water-skins, that we may set sail at the last of the night." So
the sailors did their business and awaited the coming of
darkness. Such was their case; but as regards Queen Marjanah,
when she had brought As'ad into the castle, she opened the
casements overlooking the sea and bade her handmaids bring food.
They set food before As'ad and herself and both ate, after which
the Queen called for wine.--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.

      When it was the Two Hundred and Thirty-fifth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Queen
Marjanah bade her handmaids bring wine and they set it before
her, she fell to drinking with As'ad. Now, Allah (be He extolled
and exalted!) filled her heart with love for the Prince and she
kept filling his cup and handing it to him till his reason fled;
and presently he rose and left the hall to satisfy a call of
nature. As he passed out of the saloon he saw an open door
through which he went and walked on till his walk brought him to
a vast garden full of all manner fruits and flowers; and, sitting
down under a tree, he did his occasion. Then he rose and went up
to a jetting fountain in the garden and made the lesser ablution
and washed his hands and face, after which he would have risen to
go away; but the air smote him and he fell back, with his clothes
undone and slept, and night overcame him thus. So far concerning
him; but as concerns Bahram, the night being come, he cried out
to his crew, saying, "Set sail and let us away!"; and the'
answered, "We hear and obey, but wait till we fill our water-
skins and then we will set sail." So they landed with their water
skins and went round about the castle, and found nothing but
garden-walls: whereupon they climbed over into the garden and
followed the track of feet, which led them to the fountain; and
there they found As'ad lying on his back. They knew him and were
glad to find him; and, after filling their water-skins, they bore
him off and climbed the wall again with him and carried him back
in haste to Bahram to whom they said, "Hear the good tidings of
thy winning thy wish; and gladden thy heart and beat thy drums
and sound thy pipes; for thy prisoner, whom Queen Marjanah took
from thee by force, we have found and brought back to thee"; and
they threw As'ad down before him. When Bahram saw him, his heart
leapt for joy and his breast swelled with gladness. Then he
bestowed largesse on the sailors and bade them set sail in haste.
So they sailed forthright, intending to make the Mountain of Fire
and stayed not their course till the morning. This is how it
fared with them; but as regards Queen Marjanah, she abode awhile,
after As'ad went down from her, awaiting his return in vain for
he came not; thereupon she rose and sought him, yet found no
trace of him. Then she bade her women light flambeaux and look
for him, whilst she went forth in person and, seeing the garden-
door open, knew that he had gone thither. So she went out into
the garden and finding his sandals lying by the fountain,
searched the place in every part, but came upon no sign of him;
and yet she gave not over the search till morning. Then she
enquired for the ship and they told her, "The vessel set sail in
the first watch of the night"; wherefor she knew that they had
taken As'ad with them, and this was grievous to her and she was
sore an-angered. She bade equip ten great ships forthwith and,
making ready for fight, embarked in one of the ten with her
Mamelukes and slave-women and men-at-arms, all splendidly
accoutred and weaponed for war. They spread the sails and she
said to the captains, "If you overtake the Magian's ship, ye
shall have of me dresses of honour and largesse of money; but if
you fail so to do, I will slay you to the last man." Whereat fear
and great hope animated the crews and they sailed all that day
and the night and the second day and the third day till, on the
fourth they sighted the ship of Bahram, the Magian, and before
evening fell the Queen's squadron had surrounded it on all sides,
just as Bahram had taken As'ad forth of the chest and was beating
and torturing him, whilst the Prince cried out for help and
deliverance, but found neither helper nor deliverer: and the
grievous bastinado sorely tormented him. Now while so occupied,
Bahram chanced to look up and, seeing himself encompassed by the
Queen's ships, as the white of the eye encompasseth the black, he
gave himself up for lost and groaned and said, "Woe to thee, O
As'ad! This is all out of thy head." Then taking him by the hand
he bade his men throw him overboard and cried, "By Allah I will
slay thee before I die myself!" So they carried him along by the
hands and feet and cast him into the sea and he sank; but Allah
(be He extolled and exalted!) willed that his life be saved and
that his doom be deferred; so He caused him to sink and rise
again and he struck out with his hands and feet, till the
Almighty gave him relief, and sent him deliverance; and the waves
bore him far from the Magian's ship and threw him ashore. He
landed, scarce crediting his escape, and once more on land he
doffed his clothes and wrung them and spread them out to dry;
whilst he sat naked and weeping over his condition, and bewailing
his calamities and mortal dangers, and captivity and stranger
hood. And presently he repeated these two couplets,

"Allah, my patience fails: I have no ward; *
     My breast is straitened and clean cut my cord;
To whom shall wretched slave of case complain *
     Save to his Lord? O thou of lords the Lord!"

Then, having ended his verse, he rose and donned his clothes but
he knew not whither to go or whence to come; so he fed on the
herbs of the earth and the fruits of the trees and he drank of
the streams, and fared on night and day till he came in sight of
a city; whereupon he rejoiced and hastened his pace; but when he
reached it,--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.

      When it Was the Two Hundred and Thirty-sixth Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when he
reached the city the shades of evening closed around him and the
gates were shut. Now by the decrees of Pate and man's lot this
was the very city wherein he had been a prisoner and to whose
King his brother Amjad was Minister. When As'ad saw the gate was
locked, he turned back and made for the burial-ground, where
finding a tomb without a door, he entered therein and lay down
and fell asleep, with his face covered by his long
sleeve. [FN#396] Meanwhile, Queen Marjanah, coming up with
Bahram's ship, questioned him of As'ad. Now the Magian, when
Queen Marjanah overtook him with her ships, baffled her by his
artifice and gramarye; swearing to her that he was not with him
and that he knew nothing of him. She searched the ship, but found
no trace of her friend, so she took Bahram and, carrying him back
to her castle, would have put him to death, but he ransomed
himself from her with all his good and his ship; and she released
him and his men. They went forth from her hardly believing in
their deliverance, and fared on ten days' journey till they came
to their own city and found the gate shut, it being eventide. So
they made for the burial-ground, thinking to lie the night there
and, going round about the tombs, as Fate and Fortune would have
it, saw the building wherein As'ad lay wide open; whereat Bahram
marvelled and said, "I must look into this sepulchre." Then he
entered and found As'ad lying in a corner fast asleep, with his
head covered by his sleeve; so he raised his head, and looking in
his face, knew him for the man on whose account he had lost his
good and his ship, and cried, "What! art thou yet alive?" Then he
bound him and gagged him without further parley, and carried him
to his house, where he clapped heavy shackles on his feet and
lowered him into the underground dungeon aforesaid prepared for
the tormenting of Moslems, and he bade his daughter by name
Bostan, [FN#397] torture him night and day, till the next year,
when they would again visit the Mountain of Fire and there offer
him up as a sacrifice. Then he beat him grievously and locking
the dungeon door upon him, gave the keys to his daughter. By and
by, Bostan opened the door and went down to beat him, but finding
him a comely youth and a sweet-faced with arched brows and eyes
black with nature's Kohl, [FN#398] she fell in love with him and
asked him, "What is thy name?" "My name is As'ad," answered he;
whereat she cried, "Mayst thou indeed be happy as thy
name, [FN#399] and happy be thy days! Thou deservest not torture
and blows, and I see thou hast been injuriously entreated." And
she comforted him with kind words and loosed his bonds. Then she
questioned him of the religion of Al-Islam and he told her that
it was the true and right Faith and that our lord Mohammed had
approved himself by surpassing miracles [FN#400] and signs
manifest, and that fire-worship is harmful and not profitable;
and he went on to expound to her the tenets of Al-Islam till she
was persuaded and the love of the True Faith entered her heart.
Then, as Almighty Allah had mixed up with her being a fond
affection for As'ad, she pronounced the Two Testimonies [FN#401]
of the Faith and became of the people of felicity. After this,
she brought him meat and drink and talked with him and they
prayed together: moreover, she made him chicken stews and fed him
therewith, till he regained strength and his sickness left him
and he was restored to his former health. Such things befel him
with the daughter of Bahram, the Magian; and so it happened that
one day she left him and stood at the house-door when behold, she
heard the crier crying aloud and saying, "Whoso hath with him a
handsome young man, whose favour is thus and thus, and bringeth
him forth, shall have all he seeketh of money; but if any have
him and deny it, he shall be hanged over his own door and his
property shall be plundered and his blood go for naught." Now
As'ad had acquainted Bostan bint Bahram with his whole history:
so, when she heard the crier, she knew that it was he who was
sought for and, going down to him, told him the news. Then he
fared forth and made for the mansion of the Wazir, whom, when
As'ad saw, exclaimed, "By Allah, this Minister is my brother
Amjad!" Then he went up (and the damsel walking behind him) to
the Palace, where he again saw his brother, and threw himself
upon him; whereupon Amjad also knew him and fell upon his neck
and they embraced each other, whilst the Wazir's Mamelukes
dismounted and stood round them. They lay awhile insensible and,
when they came to themselves, Amjad took his brother and carried
him to the Sultan, to whom he related the whole story, and the
Sultan charged him to plunder Bahram's house.--And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.

     When it was the Two Hundred and Thirty-seventh Night,

She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Sultan
ordered Amjad to plunder Bahram's house and to hang its owner. So
Amjad despatched thither for that purpose a company of men, who
sacked the house and took Bahram and brought his daughter to the
Wazir by whom she was received with all honour, for As'ad had
told his brother the torments he had suffered and the kindness
she had done him. Thereupon Amjad related in his turn to As'ad
all that had passed between himself and the damsel; and how he
had escaped hanging and had become Wazir; and they made moan,
each to other, of the anguish they had suffered for separation.
Then the Sultan summoned Bahram and bade strike off his head; but
he said, "O most mighty King, art thou indeed resolved to put me
to death?" Replied the King, "Yes, except thou save thyself by
becoming a Moslem." Quoth Bahram, "O King, bear with me a little
while!" Then he bowed his head groundwards and presently raising
it again, made pro fession of The Faith and islamised at the
hands of the Sultan. They all rejoiced at his conversion and
Amjad and As'ad told him all that had befallen them, whereat he
wondered and said, "O my lords, make ready for the journey and I
will depart with you and carry you back to your father's court in
a ship." At this they rejoiced and wept with sore weeping but he
said, "O my lords, weep not for your departure, for it shall
reunite you with those you love, even as were Ni'amah and Naomi."
"And what befel Ni'amah and Naomi?" asked they. "They tell,"
replied Bahram, "(but Allah alone is All knowing) the following
tale of